<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Nineteenth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>Nineteenth</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Nile.⁠—The Trembling Mountain.⁠—A Remembrance of the
 Country.⁠—The Narratives of the Arabs.⁠—The Nyam-Nyams.⁠—Joe’s
 Shrewd Cogitations.⁠—The Balloon runs the Gantlet.⁠—Aerostatic
 Ascensions.⁠—Madame Blanchard.
 </p>
			</header>
 <p>
 “Which way do we head?” asked Kennedy, as he saw his friend consulting the
 compass.
 </p>
 <p>
 “North-northeast.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “The deuce! but that’s not the north?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “No, Dick; and I’m afraid that we shall have some trouble in getting to
 Gondokoro. I am sorry for it; but, at last, we have succeeded in
 connecting the explorations from the east with those from the north; and
 we must not complain.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The balloon was now receding gradually from the Nile.
 </p>
 <p>
 “One last look,” said the doctor, “at this impassable latitude, beyond
 which the most intrepid travellers could not make their way. There are
 those intractable tribes, of whom Petherick, Arnaud, Miuni, and the young
 traveller Lejean, to whom we are indebted for the best work on the Upper
 Nile, have spoken.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Thus, then,” added Kennedy, inquiringly, “our discoveries agree with the
 speculations of science.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Absolutely so. The sources of the White Nile, of the Bahr-el-Abiad, are
 immersed in a lake as large as a sea; it is there that it takes its rise.
 Poesy, undoubtedly, loses something thereby. People were fond of ascribing
 a celestial origin to this king of rivers. The ancients gave it the name
 of an ocean, and were not far from believing that it flowed directly from
 the sun; but we must come down from these flights from time to time, and
 accept what science teaches us. There will not always be scientific men,
 perhaps; but there always will be poets.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “We can still see cataracts,” said Joe.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Those are the cataracts of Makedo, in the third degree of latitude.
 Nothing could be more accurate. Oh, if we could only have followed the
 course of the Nile for a few hours!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And down yonder, below us, I see the top of a mountain,” said the hunter.
 </p>
 <p>
 “That is Mount Longwek, the <i>Trembling Mountain</i> of the Arabs. This whole
 country was visited by Debono, who went through it under the name of
 Latif-Effendi. The tribes living near the Nile are hostile to each other,
 and are continually waging a war of extermination. You may form some idea,
 then, of the difficulties he had to encounter.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The wind was carrying the balloon toward the northwest, and, in order to
 avoid Mount Longwek, it was necessary to seek a more slanting current.
 </p>
 <p>
 “My friends,” said the doctor, “here is where <em>our</em> passage of the African
 Continent really commences; up to this time we have been following the
 traces of our predecessors. Henceforth we are to launch ourselves upon the
 unknown. We shall not lack the courage, shall we?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Never!” said Dick and Joe together, almost in a shout.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Onward, then, and may we have the help of Heaven!”
 </p>
 <p>
 At ten o’clock at night, after passing over ravines, forests, and
 scattered villages, the aeronauts reached the side of the Trembling
 Mountain, along whose gentle slopes they went quietly gliding. In that
 memorable day, the 23d of April, they had, in fifteen hours, impelled by a
 rapid breeze, traversed a distance of more than three hundred and fifteen
 miles.
 </p>
 <p>
 But this latter part of the journey had left them in dull spirits, and
 complete silence reigned in the car. Was <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson absorbed in the
 thought of his discoveries? Were his two companions thinking of their trip
 through those unknown regions? There were, no doubt, mingled with these
 reflections, the keenest reminiscences of home and distant friends. Joe
 alone continued to manifest the same careless philosophy, finding it <i>quite
 natural</i> that home should not be there, from the moment that he left it;
 but he respected the silent mood of his friends, the doctor and Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 About ten the balloon anchored on the side of the Trembling Mountain, so
 called, because, in Arab tradition, it is said to tremble the instant that
 a Mussulman sets foot upon it. The travellers then partook of a
 substantial meal, and all quietly passed the night as usual, keeping the
 regular watches.
 </p>
 <p>
 On awaking the next morning, they all had pleasanter feelings. The weather
 was fine, and the wind was blowing from the right quarter; so that a good
 breakfast, seasoned with Joe’s merry pranks, put them in high good-humor.
 </p>
 <p>
 The region they were now crossing is very extensive. It borders on the
 Mountains of the Moon on one side, and those of Darfur on the other⁠—a
 space about as broad as Europe.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We are, no doubt, crossing what is supposed to be the kingdom of Usoga.
 Geographers have pretended that there existed, in the centre of Africa, a
 vast depression, an immense central lake. We shall see whether there is
 any truth in that idea,” said the doctor.
 </p>
 <p>
 “But how did they come to think so?” asked Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “From the recitals of the Arabs. Those fellows are great narrators⁠—too
 much so, probably. Some travellers, who had got as far as Kazeh, or the
 great lakes, saw slaves that had been brought from this region;
 interrogated them concerning it, and, from their different narratives,
 made up a jumble of notions, and deduced systems from them. Down at the
 bottom of it all there is some appearance of truth; and you see that they
 were right about the sources of the Nile.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Nothing could be more correct,” said Kennedy. “It was by the aid of these
 documents that some attempts at maps were made, and so I am going to try
 to follow our route by one of them, rectifying it when need be.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Is all this region inhabited?” asked Joe.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Undoubtedly; and disagreeably inhabited, too.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I thought so.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “These scattered tribes come, one and all, under the title of Nyam-Nyams,
 and this compound word is only a sort of nickname. It imitates the sound
 of chewing.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “That’s it! Excellent!” said Joe, champing his teeth as though he were
 eating; “Nyam-Nyam.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “My good Joe, if you were the immediate object of this chewing, you
 wouldn’t find it so excellent.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Why, what’s the reason, sir?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “These tribes are considered man-eaters.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Is that really the case?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Not a doubt of it! It has also been asserted that these natives had
 tails, like mere quadrupeds; but it was soon discovered that these
 appendages belonged to the skins of animals that they wore for clothing.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “More’s the pity! a tail’s a nice thing to chase away mosquitoes.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “That may be, Joe; but we must consign the story to the domain of fable,
 like the dogs’ heads which the traveller, Brun-Rollet, attributed to other
 tribes.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Dogs’ heads, eh? Quite convenient for barking, and even for man-eating!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But one thing that has been, unfortunately, proven true, is, the ferocity
 of these tribes, who are really very fond of human flesh, and devour it
 with avidity.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I only hope that they won’t take such a particular fancy to mine!” said
 Joe, with comic solemnity.
 </p>
 <p>
 “See that!” said Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Yes, indeed, sir; if I have to be eaten, in a moment of famine, I want it
 to be for your benefit and my master’s; but the idea of feeding those
 black fellows⁠—gracious! I’d die of shame!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, then, Joe,” said Kennedy, “that’s understood; we count upon you in
 case of need!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “At your service, gentlemen!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Joe talks in this way so as to make us take good care of him, and fatten
 him up.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Maybe so!” said Joe. “Every man for himself.”
 </p>
 <p>
 In the afternoon, the sky became covered with a warm mist, that oozed from
 the soil; the brownish vapor scarcely allowed the beholder to distinguish
 objects, and so, fearing collision with some unexpected mountain-peak, the
 doctor, about five o’clock, gave the signal to halt.
 </p>
 <p>
 The night passed without accident, but in such profound obscurity, that it
 was necessary to use redoubled vigilance.
 </p>
 <p>
 The monsoon blew with extreme violence during all the next morning. The
 wind buried itself in the lower cavities of the balloon and shook the
 appendage by which the dilating-pipes entered the main apparatus. They
 had, at last, to be tied up with cords, Joe acquitting himself very
 skilfully in performing that operation.
 </p>
 <p>
 He had occasion to observe, at the same time, that the orifice of the
 balloon still remained hermetically sealed.
 </p>
 <p>
 “That is a matter of double importance for us,” said the doctor; “in the
 first place, we avoid the escape of precious gas, and then, again, we do
 not leave behind us an inflammable train, which we should at last
 inevitably set fire to, and so be consumed.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “That would be a disagreeable travelling incident!” said Joe.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Should we be hurled to the ground?” asked Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Hurled! No, not quite that. The gas would burn quietly, and we should
 descend little by little. A similar accident happened to a French
 aeronaut, Madame Blanchard. She ignited her balloon while sending off
 fireworks, but she did not fall, and she would not have been killed,
 probably, had not her car dashed against a chimney and precipitated her to
 the ground.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Let us hope that nothing of the kind may happen to us,” said the hunter.
 “Up to this time our trip has not seemed to me very dangerous, and I can
 see nothing to prevent us reaching our destination.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Nor can I either, my dear Dick; accidents are generally caused by the
 imprudence of the aeronauts, or the defective construction of their
 apparatus. However, in thousands of aerial ascensions, there have not been
 twenty fatal accidents. Usually, the danger is in the moment of leaving
 the ground, or of alighting, and therefore at those junctures we should
 never omit the utmost precaution.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It’s breakfast-time,” said Joe; “we’ll have to put up with preserved meat
 and coffee until <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennedy has had another chance to get us a good slice
 of venison.”
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
