<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XL</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Thirty-Ninth</h2>
 <p>
 The Country in the Elbow of the Niger.⁠—A Fantastic View of the
 Hombori Mountains.⁠—Kabra.⁠—Timbuctoo.⁠—The Chart of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barth.⁠—A Decaying City.⁠—Whither Heaven wills.
 </p>
 <p>
 During this dull Monday, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson diverted his thoughts by giving his
 companions a thousand details concerning the country they were crossing.
 The surface, which was quite flat, offered no impediment to their
 progress. The doctor’s sole anxiety arose from the obstinate northeast
 wind which continued to blow furiously, and bore them away from the
 latitude of Timbuctoo.
 </p>
 <p>
 The Niger, after running northward as far as that city, sweeps around,
 like an immense water-jet from some fountain, and falls into the Atlantic
 in a broad sheaf. In the elbow thus formed the country is of varied
 character, sometimes luxuriantly fertile, and sometimes extremely bare;
 fields of maize succeeded by wide spaces covered with broom-corn and
 uncultivated plains. All kinds of aquatic birds⁠—pelicans, wild-duck,
 kingfishers, and the rest⁠—were seen in numerous flocks hovering
 about the borders of the pools and torrents.
 </p>
 <p>
 From time to time there appeared an encampment of Touaregs, the men
 sheltered under their leather tents, while their women were busied with
 the domestic toil outside, milking their camels and smoking their
 huge-bowled pipes.
 </p>
 <p>
 By eight o’clock in the evening the Victoria had advanced more than two
 hundred miles to the westward, and our aeronauts became the spectators of
 a magnificent scene.
 </p>
 <p>
 A mass of moonbeams forcing their way through an opening in the clouds,
 and gliding between the long lines of falling rain, descended in a golden
 shower on the ridges of the Hombori Mountains. Nothing could be more weird
 than the appearance of these seemingly basaltic summits; they stood out in
 fantastic profile against the sombre sky, and the beholder might have
 fancied them to be the legendary ruins of some vast city of the middle
 ages, such as the icebergs of the polar seas sometimes mimic them in
 nights of gloom.
 </p>
 <p>
 “An admirable landscape for the ‘Mysteries of Udolpho’!” exclaimed the
 doctor. “Ann Radcliffe could not have depicted yon mountains in a more
 appalling aspect.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Faith!” said Joe, “I wouldn’t like to be strolling alone in the evening
 through this country of ghosts. Do you see now, master, if it wasn’t so
 heavy, I’d like to carry that whole landscape home to Scotland! It would
 do for the borders of Loch Lomond, and tourists would rush there in
 crowds.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Our balloon is hardly large enough to admit of that little experiment⁠—but
 I think our direction is changing. Bravo!⁠—the elves and fairies of
 the place are quite obliging. See, they’ve sent us a nice little southeast
 breeze, that will put us on the right track again.”
 </p>
 <p>
 In fact, the Victoria was resuming a more northerly route, and on the
 morning of the 20th she was passing over an inextricable network of
 channels, torrents, and streams, in fine, the whole complicated tangle of
 the Niger’s tributaries. Many of these channels, covered with a thick
 growth of herbage, resembled luxuriant meadow-lands. There the doctor
 recognized the route followed by the explorer Barth when he launched upon
 the river to descend to Timbuctoo. Eight hundred fathoms broad at this
 point, the Niger flowed between banks richly grown with cruciferous plants
 and tamarind-trees. Herds of agile gazelles were seen skipping about,
 their curling horns mingling with the tall herbage, within which the
 alligator, half concealed, lay silently in wait for them with watchful
 eyes.
 </p>
 <p>
 Long files of camels and asses laden with merchandise from Jenne were
 winding in under the noble trees. Ere long, an amphitheatre of low-built
 houses was discovered at a turn of the river, their roofs and terraces
 heaped up with hay and straw gathered from the neighboring districts.
 </p>
 <p>
 “There’s Kabra!” exclaimed the doctor, joyously; “there is the harbor of
 Timbuctoo, and the city is not five miles from here!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Then, sir, you are satisfied?” half queried Joe.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Delighted, my boy!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Very good; then every thing’s for the best!”
 </p>
 <p>
 In fact, about two o’clock, the Queen of the Desert, mysterious Timbuctoo,
 which once, like Athens and Rome, had her schools of learned men, and her
 professorships of philosophy, stretched away before the gaze of our
 travellers.
 </p>
 <p>
 Ferguson followed the most minute details upon the chart traced by Barth
 himself, and was enabled to recognize its perfect accuracy.
 </p>
 <p>
 The city forms an immense triangle marked out upon a vast plain of white
 sand, its acute angle directed toward the north and piercing a corner of
 the desert. In the environs there was almost nothing, hardly even a few
 grasses, with some dwarf mimosas and stunted bushes.
 </p>
 <p>
 As for the appearance of Timbuctoo, the reader has but to imagine a
 collection of billiard-balls and thimbles⁠—such is the bird’s-eye
 view! The streets, which are quite narrow, are lined with houses only one
 story in height, built of bricks dried in the sun, and huts of straw and
 reeds, the former square, the latter conical. Upon the terraces were seen
 some of the male inhabitants, carelessly lounging at full length in
 flowing apparel of bright colors, and lance or musket in hand; but no
 women were visible at that hour of the day.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Yet they are said to be handsome,” remarked the doctor. “You see the
 three towers of the three mosques that are the only ones left standing of
 a great number⁠—the city has indeed fallen from its ancient splendor!
 At the top of the triangle rises the Mosque of Sankore, with its ranges of
 galleries resting on arcades of sufficiently pure design. Farther on, and
 near to the Sane-Gungu quarter, is the Mosque of Sidi-Yahia and some
 two-story houses. But do not look for either palaces or monuments: the
 sheik is a mere son of traffic, and his royal palace is a counting-house.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It seems to me that I can see half-ruined ramparts,” said Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “They were destroyed by the Fouillanes in 1826; the city was one-third
 larger then, for Timbuctoo, an object generally coveted by all the tribes,
 since the eleventh century, has belonged in succession to the Touaregs,
 the Sonrayans, the Morocco men, and the Fouillanes; and this great centre
 of civilization, where a sage like Ahmed-Baba owned, in the sixteenth
 century, a library of sixteen hundred manuscripts, is now nothing but a
 mere half-way house for the trade of Central Africa.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The city, indeed, seemed abandoned to supreme neglect; it betrayed that
 indifference which seems epidemic to cities that are passing away. Huge
 heaps of rubbish encumbered the suburbs, and, with the hill on which the
 market-place stood, formed the only inequalities of the ground.
 </p>
 <p>
 When the Victoria passed, there was some slight show of movement; drums
 were beaten; but the last learned man still lingering in the place had
 hardly time to notice the new phenomenon, for our travellers, driven
 onward by the wind of the desert, resumed the winding course of the river,
 and, ere long, Timbuctoo was nothing more than one of the fleeting
 reminiscences of their journey.
 </p>
 <p>
 “And now,” said the doctor, “Heaven may waft us whither it pleases!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Provided only that we go westward,” added Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Bah!” said Joe; “I wouldn’t be afraid if it was to go back to Zanzibar by
 the same road, or to cross the ocean to America.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “We would first have to be able to do that, Joe!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And what’s wanting, doctor?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Gas, my boy; the ascending force of the balloon is evidently growing
 weaker, and we shall need all our management to make it carry us to the
 sea-coast. I shall even have to throw over some ballast. We are too
 heavy.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “That’s what comes of doing nothing, doctor; when a man lies stretched out
 all day long in his hammock, he gets fat and heavy. It’s a lazybones trip,
 this of ours, master, and when we get back every body will find us big and
 stout.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Just like Joe,” said Kennedy; “just the ideas for him: but wait a bit!
 Can you tell what we may have to go through yet? We are still far from the
 end of our trip. Where do you expect to strike the African coast, doctor?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I should find it hard to answer you, Kennedy. We are at the mercy of very
 variable winds; but I should think myself fortunate were we to strike it
 between Sierra Leone and Portendick. There is a stretch of country in that
 quarter where we should meet with friends.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And it would be a pleasure to press their hands; but, are we going in the
 desirable direction?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Not any too well, Dick; not any too well! Look at the needle of the
 compass; we are bearing southward, and ascending the Niger toward its
 sources.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “A fine chance to discover them,” said Joe, “if they were not known
 already. Now, couldn’t we just find others for it, on a pinch?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Not exactly, Joe; but don’t be alarmed: I hardly expect to go so far as
 that.”
 </p>
 <p>
 At nightfall the doctor threw out the last bags of sand. The Victoria rose
 higher, and the blow-pipe, although working at full blast, could scarcely
 keep her up. At that time she was sixty miles to the southward of
 Timbuctoo, and in the morning the aeronauts awoke over the banks of the
 Niger, not far from Lake Debo.
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
