<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Eleventh</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>Eleventh</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Arrival at Zanzibar.⁠—The English Consul.⁠—Ill-will of the
 Inhabitants.⁠—The Island of Koumbeni.⁠—The Rainmakers.⁠—Inflation
 of the Balloon.⁠—Departure on the 18th of April.⁠—The last
 Goodbye.⁠—The Victoria.
 </p>
			</header>
 <p>
 An invariably favorable wind had accelerated the progress of the <i>Resolute</i>
 toward the place of her destination. The navigation of the Mozambique
 Channel was especially calm and pleasant. The agreeable character of the
 trip by sea was regarded as a good omen of the probable issue of the trip
 through the air. Every one looked forward to the hour of arrival, and
 sought to give the last touch to the doctor’s preparations.
 </p>
 <p>
 At length the vessel hove in sight of the town of Zanzibar, upon the
 island of the same name, and, on the 15th of April, at 11 o’clock in the
 morning, she anchored in the port.
 </p>
 <p>
 The island of Zanzibar belongs to the Imaum of Muscat, an ally of France
 and England, and is, undoubtedly, his finest settlement. The port is
 frequented by a great many vessels from the neighboring countries.
 </p>
 <p>
 The island is separated from the African coast only by a channel, the
 greatest width of which is but thirty miles.
 </p>
 <p>
 It has a large trade in gums, ivory, and, above all, in “ebony,” for
 Zanzibar is the great slave-market. Thither converges all the booty
 captured in the battles which the chiefs of the interior are continually
 fighting. This traffic extends along the whole eastern coast, and as far
 as the Nile latitudes. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> G. Lejean even reports that he has seen it
 carried on, openly, under the French flag.
 </p>
 <p>
 Upon the arrival of the <i>Resolute</i>, the English consul at Zanzibar came on
 board to offer his services to the doctor, of whose projects the European
 newspapers had made him aware for a month past. But, up to that moment, he
 had remained with the numerous phalanx of the incredulous.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I doubted,” said he, holding out his hand to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson, “but now I
 doubt no longer.”
 </p>
 <p>
 He invited the doctor, Kennedy, and the faithful Joe, of course, to his
 own dwelling. Through his courtesy, the doctor was enabled to have
 knowledge of the various letters that he had received from Captain Speke.
 The captain and his companions had suffered dreadfully from hunger and bad
 weather before reaching the Ugogo country. They could advance only with
 extreme difficulty, and did not expect to be able to communicate again for
 a long time.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Those are perils and privations which we shall manage to avoid,” said the
 doctor.
 </p>
 <p>
 The baggage of the three travellers was conveyed to the consul’s
 residence. Arrangements were made for disembarking the balloon upon the
 beach at Zanzibar. There was a convenient spot, near the signal-mast,
 close by an immense building, that would serve to shelter it from the east
 winds. This huge tower, resembling a tun standing on one end, beside which
 the famous Heidelberg tun would have seemed but a very ordinary barrel,
 served as a fortification, and on its platform were stationed Belootchees,
 armed with lances. These Belootchees are a kind of brawling,
 good-for-nothing Janizaries.
 </p>
 <p>
 But, when about to land the balloon, the consul was informed that the
 population of the island would oppose their doing so by force. Nothing is
 so blind as fanatical passion. The news of the arrival of a Christian, who
 was to ascend into the air, was received with rage. The negroes, more
 exasperated than the Arabs, saw in this project an attack upon their
 religion. They took it into their heads that some mischief was meant to
 the sun and the moon. Now, these two luminaries are objects of veneration
 to the African tribes, and they determined to oppose so sacrilegious an
 enterprise.
 </p>
 <p>
 The consul, informed of their intentions, conferred with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson and
 Captain Bennet on the subject. The latter was unwilling to yield to
 threats, but his friend dissuaded him from any idea of violent
 retaliation.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We shall certainly come out winners,” he said. “Even the imaum’s soldiers
 will lend us a hand, if we need it. But, my dear captain, an accident may
 happen in a moment, and it would require but one unlucky blow to do the
 balloon an irreparable injury, so that the trip would be totally defeated;
 therefore we must act with the greatest caution.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But what are we to do? If we land on the coast of Africa, we shall
 encounter the same difficulties. What are we to do?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Nothing is more simple,” replied the consul. “You observe those small
 islands outside of the port; land your balloon on one of them; surround it
 with a guard of sailors, and you will have no risk to run.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Just the thing!” said the doctor, “and we shall be entirely at our ease
 in completing our preparations.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The captain yielded to these suggestions, and the <i>Resolute</i> was headed for
 the island of Koumbeni. During the morning of the 16th April, the balloon
 was placed in safety in the middle of a clearing in the great woods, with
 which the soil is studded.
 </p>
 <p>
 Two masts, eighty feet in height, were raised at the same distance from
 each other. Blocks and tackle, placed at their extremities, afforded the
 means of elevating the balloon, by the aid of a transverse rope. It was
 then entirely uninflated. The interior balloon was fastened to the
 exterior one, in such manner as to be lifted up in the same way. To the
 lower end of each balloon were fixed the pipes that served to introduce
 the hydrogen gas.
 </p>
 <p>
 The whole day, on the 17th, was spent in arranging the apparatus destined
 to produce the gas; it consisted of some thirty casks, in which the
 decomposition of water was effected by means of iron-filings and sulphuric
 acid placed together in a large quantity of the first-named fluid. The
 hydrogen passed into a huge central cask, after having been washed on the
 way, and thence into each balloon by the conduit-pipes. In this manner
 each of them received a certain accurately-ascertained quantity of gas.
 For this purpose, there had to be employed eighteen hundred and sixty-six
 pounds of sulphuric acid, sixteen thousand and fifty pounds of iron, and
 nine thousand one hundred and sixty-six gallons of water. This operation
 commenced on the following night, about three <abbr class="time eoc">a.m.</abbr>, and lasted nearly
 eight hours. The next day, the balloon, covered with its network,
 undulated gracefully above its car, which was held to the ground by
 numerous sacks of earth. The inflating apparatus was put together with
 extreme care, and the pipes issuing from the balloon were securely fitted
 to the cylindrical case.
 </p>
 <p>
 The anchors, the cordage, the instruments, the travelling-wraps, the
 awning, the provisions, and the arms, were put in the place assigned to
 them in the car. The supply of water was procured at Zanzibar. The two
 hundred pounds of ballast were distributed in fifty bags placed at the
 bottom of the car, but within arm’s-reach.
 </p>
 <p>
 These preparations were concluded about five o’clock in the evening, while
 sentinels kept close watch around the island, and the boats of the
 <i>Resolute</i> patrolled the channel.
 </p>
 <p>
 The blacks continued to show their displeasure by grimaces and
 contortions. Their obi-men, or wizards, went up and down among the angry
 throngs, pouring fuel on the flame of their fanaticism; and some of the
 excited wretches, more furious and daring than the rest, attempted to get
 to the island by swimming, but they were easily driven off.
 </p>
 <p>
 Thereupon the sorceries and incantations commenced; the “rainmakers,” who
 pretend to have control over the clouds, invoked the storms and the
 “stone-showers,” as the blacks call hail, to their aid. To compel them to
 do so, they plucked leaves of all the different trees that grow in that
 country, and boiled them over a slow fire, while, at the same time, a
 sheep was killed by thrusting a long needle into its heart. But, in spite
 of all their ceremonies, the sky remained clear and beautiful, and they
 profited nothing by their slaughtered sheep and their ugly grimaces.
 </p>
 <p>
 The blacks then abandoned themselves to the most furious orgies, and got
 fearfully drunk on <i>tembo</i>, a kind of ardent spirits drawn from the
 coconut tree, and an extremely heady sort of beer called <i>togwa</i>. Their
 chants, which were destitute of all melody, but were sung in excellent
 time, continued until far into the night.
 </p>
 <p>
 About six o’clock in the evening, the captain assembled the travellers and
 the officers of the ship at a farewell repast in his cabin. Kennedy, whom
 nobody ventured to question now, sat with his eyes riveted on <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson, murmuring indistinguishable words. In other respects, the dinner
 was a gloomy one. The approach of the final moment filled everybody with
 the most serious reflections. What had fate in store for these daring
 adventurers? Should they ever again find themselves in the midst of their
 friends, or seated at the domestic hearth? Were their travelling apparatus
 to fail, what would become of them, among those ferocious savage tribes,
 in regions that had never been explored, and in the midst of boundless
 deserts?
 </p>
 <p>
 Such thoughts as these, which had been dim and vague until then, or but
 slightly regarded when they came up, returned upon their excited fancies
 with intense force at this parting moment. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson, still cold and
 impassible, talked of this, that, and the other; but he strove in vain to
 overcome this infectious gloominess. He utterly failed.
 </p>
 <p>
 As some demonstration against the personal safety of the doctor and his
 companions was feared, all three slept that night on board the <i>Resolute</i>.
 At six o’clock in the morning they left their cabin, and landed on the
 island of Koumbeni.
 </p>
 <p>
 The balloon was swaying gently to and fro in the morning breeze; the
 sandbags that had held it down were now replaced by some twenty
 strong-armed sailors, and Captain Bennet and his officers were present to
 witness the solemn departure of their friends.
 </p>
 <p>
 At this moment Kennedy went right up to the doctor, grasped his hand, and
 said:
 </p>
 <p>
 “Samuel, have you absolutely determined to go?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Solemnly determined, my dear Dick.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I have done every thing that I could to prevent this expedition, have I
 not?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Every thing!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, then, my conscience is clear on that score, and I will go with
 you.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I was sure you would!” said the doctor, betraying in his features swift
 traces of emotion.
 </p>
 <p>
 At last the moment of final leave-taking arrived. The captain and his
 officers embraced their dauntless friends with great feeling, not
 excepting even Joe, who, worthy fellow, was as proud and happy as a
 prince. Every one in the party insisted upon having a final shake of the
 doctor’s hand.
 </p>
 <p>
 At nine o’clock the three travellers got into their car. The doctor lit
 the combustible in his cylinder and turned the flame so as to produce a
 rapid heat, and the balloon, which had rested on the ground in perfect
 equipoise, began to rise in a few minutes, so that the seamen had to
 slacken the ropes they held it by. The car then rose about twenty feet
 above their heads.
 </p>
 <p>
 “My friends!” exclaimed the doctor, standing up between his two
 companions, and taking off his hat, “let us give our aerial ship a name
 that will bring her good luck! let us christen her Victoria!”
 </p>
 <p>
 This speech was answered with stentorian cheers of “Huzza for the Queen!
 Huzza for Old England!”
 </p>
 <p>
 At this moment the ascensional force of the balloon increased
 prodigiously, and Ferguson, Kennedy, and Joe, waved a last goodbye to
 their friends.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Let go all!” shouted the doctor, and at the word the Victoria shot
 rapidly up into the sky, while the four carronades on board the <i>Resolute</i>
 thundered forth a parting salute in her honor.
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
