<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      CHAPTER FOURTH.
    </h2>
    <p>
      African Explorations.—Barth, Richardson, Overweg, Werne,
      Brun-Rollet, Penney, Andrea, Debono, Miani, Guillaume Lejean, Bruce, Krapf
      and Rebmann, Maizan, Roscher, Burton and Speke.
    </p>
    <p>
      The aerial line which Dr. Ferguson counted upon following had not been
      chosen at random; his point of departure had been carefully studied, and
      it was not without good cause that he had resolved to ascend at the island
      of Zanzibar. This island, lying near to the eastern coast of Africa, is in
      the sixth degree of south latitude, that is to say, four hundred and
      thirty geographical miles below the equator.
    </p>
    <p>
      From this island the latest expedition, sent by way of the great lakes to
      explore the sources of the Nile, had just set out.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it would be well to indicate what explorations Dr. Ferguson hoped to
      link together. The two principal ones were those of Dr. Barth in 1849, and
      of Lieutenants Burton and Speke in 1858.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dr. Barth is a Hamburger, who obtained permission for himself and for his
      countryman Overweg to join the expedition of the Englishman Richardson.
      The latter was charged with a mission in the Soudan.
    </p>
    <p>
      This vast region is situated between the fifteenth and tenth degrees of
      north latitude; that is to say, that, in order to approach it, the
      explorer must penetrate fifteen hundred miles into the interior of Africa.
    </p>
    <p>
      Until then, the country in question had been known only through the
      journeys of Denham, of Clapperton, and of Oudney, made from 1822 to 1824.
      Richardson, Barth, and Overweg, jealously anxious to push their
      investigations farther, arrived at Tunis and Tripoli, like their
      predecessors, and got as far as Mourzouk, the capital of Fezzan.
    </p>
    <p>
      They then abandoned the perpendicular line, and made a sharp turn westward
      toward Ghat, guided, with difficulty, by the Touaregs. After a thousand
      scenes of pillage, of vexation, and attacks by armed forces, their caravan
      arrived, in October, at the vast oasis of Asben. Dr. Barth separated from
      his companions, made an excursion to the town of Aghades, and rejoined the
      expedition, which resumed its march on the 12th of December. At length it
      reached the province of Damerghou; there the three travellers parted, and
      Barth took the road to Kano, where he arrived by dint of perseverance, and
      after paying considerable tribute.
    </p>
    <p>
      In spite of an intense fever, he quitted that place on the 7th of March,
      accompanied by a single servant. The principal aim of his journey was to
      reconnoitre Lake Tchad, from which he was still three hundred and fifty
      miles distant. He therefore advanced toward the east, and reached the town
      of Zouricolo, in the Bornou country, which is the core of the great
      central empire of Africa. There he heard of the death of Richardson, who
      had succumbed to fatigue and privation. He next arrived at Kouka, the
      capital of Bornou, on the borders of the lake. Finally, at the end of
      three weeks, on the 14th of April, twelve months after having quitted
      Tripoli, he reached the town of Ngornou.
    </p>
    <p>
      We find him again setting forth on the 29th of March, 1851, with Overweg,
      to visit the kingdom of Adamaoua, to the south of the lake, and from there
      he pushed on as far as the town of Yola, a little below nine degrees north
      latitude. This was the extreme southern limit reached by that daring
      traveller.
    </p>
    <p>
      He returned in the month of August to Kouka; from there he successively
      traversed the Mandara, Barghimi, and Klanem countries, and reached his
      extreme limit in the east, the town of Masena, situated at seventeen
      degrees twenty minutes west longitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the 25th of November, 1852, after the death of Overweg, his last
      companion, he plunged into the west, visited Sockoto, crossed the Niger,
      and finally reached Timbuctoo, where he had to languish, during eight long
      months, under vexations inflicted upon him by the sheik, and all kinds of
      ill-treatment and wretchedness. But the presence of a Christian in the
      city could not long be tolerated, and the Foullans threatened to besiege
      it. The doctor, therefore, left it on the 17th of March, 1854, and fled to
      the frontier, where he remained for thirty-three days in the most abject
      destitution. He then managed to get back to Kano in November, thence to
      Kouka, where he resumed Denham’s route after four months’ delay. He
      regained Tripoli toward the close of August, 1855, and arrived in London
      on the 6th of September, the only survivor of his party.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such was the venturesome journey of Dr. Barth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dr. Ferguson carefully noted the fact, that he had stopped at four degrees
      north latitude and seventeen degrees west longitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now let us see what Lieutenants Burton and Speke accomplished in Eastern
      Africa.
    </p>
    <p>
      The various expeditions that had ascended the Nile could never manage to
      reach the mysterious source of that river. According to the narrative of
      the German doctor, Ferdinand Werne, the expedition attempted in 1840,
      under the auspices of Mehemet Ali, stopped at Gondokoro, between the
      fourth and fifth parallels of north latitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      In 1855, Brun-Rollet, a native of Savoy, appointed consul for Sardinia in
      Eastern Soudan, to take the place of Vaudey, who had just died, set out
      from Karthoum, and, under the name of Yacoub the merchant, trading in gums
      and ivory, got as far as Belenia, beyond the fourth degree, but had to
      return in ill-health to Karthoum, where he died in 1857.
    </p>
    <p>
      Neither Dr. Penney—the head of the Egyptian medical service, who, in
      a small steamer, penetrated one degree beyond Gondokoro, and then came
      back to die of exhaustion at Karthoum—nor Miani, the Venetian, who,
      turning the cataracts below Gondokoro, reached the second parallel—nor
      the Maltese trader, Andrea Debono, who pushed his journey up the Nile
      still farther—could work their way beyond the apparently impassable
      limit.
    </p>
    <p>
      In 1859, M. Guillaume Lejean, intrusted with a mission by the French
      Government, reached Karthoum by way of the Red Sea, and embarked upon the
      Nile with a retinue of twenty-one hired men and twenty soldiers, but he
      could not get past Gondokoro, and ran extreme risk of his life among the
      negro tribes, who were in full revolt. The expedition directed by M.
      d’Escayrac de Lauture made an equally unsuccessful attempt to reach the
      famous sources of the Nile.
    </p>
    <p>
      This fatal limit invariably brought every traveller to a halt. In ancient
      times, the ambassadors of Nero reached the ninth degree of latitude, but
      in eighteen centuries only from five to six degrees, or from three hundred
      to three hundred and sixty geographical miles, were gained.
    </p>
    <p>
      Many travellers endeavored to reach the sources of the Nile by taking
      their point of departure on the eastern coast of Africa.
    </p>
    <p>
      Between 1768 and 1772 the Scotch traveller, Bruce, set out from Massowah,
      a port of Abyssinia, traversed the Tigre, visited the ruins of Axum, saw
      the sources of the Nile where they did not exist, and obtained no serious
      result.
    </p>
    <p>
      In 1844, Dr. Krapf, an Anglican missionary, founded an establishment at
      Monbaz, on the coast of Zanguebar, and, in company with the Rev. Dr.
      Rebmann, discovered two mountain-ranges three hundred miles from the
      coast. These were the mountains of Kilimandjaro and Kenia, which Messrs.
      de Heuglin and Thornton have partly scaled so recently.
    </p>
    <p>
      In 1845, Maizan, the French explorer, disembarked, alone, at Bagamayo,
      directly opposite to Zanzibar, and got as far as Deje-la-Mhora, where the
      chief caused him to be put to death in the most cruel torment.
    </p>
    <p>
      In 1859, in the month of August, the young traveller, Roscher, from
      Hamburg, set out with a caravan of Arab merchants, reached Lake Nyassa,
      and was there assassinated while he slept.
    </p>
    <p>
      Finally, in 1857, Lieutenants Burton and Speke, both officers in the
      Bengal army, were sent by the London Geographical Society to explore the
      great African lakes, and on the 17th of June they quitted Zanzibar, and
      plunged directly into the west.
    </p>
    <p>
      After four months of incredible suffering, their baggage having been
      pillaged, and their attendants beaten and slain, they arrived at Kazeh, a
      sort of central rendezvous for traders and caravans. They were in the
      midst of the country of the Moon, and there they collected some precious
      documents concerning the manners, government, religion, fauna, and flora
      of the region. They next made for the first of the great lakes, the one
      named Tanganayika, situated between the third and eighth degrees of south
      latitude. They reached it on the 14th of February, 1858, and visited the
      various tribes residing on its banks, the most of whom are cannibals.
    </p>
    <p>
      They departed again on the 26th of May, and reentered Kazeh on the 20th of
      June. There Burton, who was completely worn out, lay ill for several
      months, during which time Speke made a push to the northward of more than
      three hundred miles, going as far as Lake Okeracua, which he came in sight
      of on the 3d of August; but he could descry only the opening of it at
      latitude two degrees thirty minutes.
    </p>
    <p>
      He reached Kazeh, on his return, on the 25th of August, and, in company
      with Burton, again took up the route to Zanzibar, where they arrived in
      the month of March in the following year. These two daring explorers then
      reembarked for England; and the Geographical Society of Paris decreed them
      its annual prize medal.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dr. Ferguson carefully remarked that they had not gone beyond the second
      degree of south latitude, nor the twenty-ninth of east longitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      The problem, therefore, was how to link the explorations of Burton and
      Speke with those of Dr. Barth, since to do so was to undertake to traverse
      an extent of more than twelve degrees of territory.
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
