<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVENTH.
    </h2>
    <p>
      Terrific Heat.—Hallucinations.—The Last Drops of Water.—Nights
      of Despair.—An Attempt at Suicide.—The Simoom.—The
      Oasis.—The Lion and Lioness.
    </p>
    <p>
      The doctor’s first care, on the morrow, was to consult the barometer. He
      found that the mercury had scarcely undergone any perceptible depression.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Nothing!” he murmured, “nothing!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He got out of the car and scrutinized the weather; there was only the same
      heat, the same cloudless sky, the same merciless drought.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Must we, then, give up to despair?” he exclaimed, in agony.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joe did not open his lips. He was buried in his own thoughts, and planning
      the expedition he had proposed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Kennedy got up, feeling very ill, and a prey to nervous agitation. He was
      suffering horribly with thirst, and his swollen tongue and lips could
      hardly articulate a syllable.
    </p>
    <p>
      There still remained a few drops of water. Each of them knew this, and
      each was thinking of it, and felt himself drawn toward them; but neither
      of the three dared to take a step.
    </p>
    <p>
      Those three men, friends and companions as they were, fixed their haggard
      eyes upon each other with an instinct of ferocious longing, which was most
      plainly revealed in the hardy Scot, whose vigorous constitution yielded
      the soonest to these unnatural privations.
    </p>
    <p>
      Throughout the day he was delirious, pacing up and down, uttering hoarse
      cries, gnawing his clinched fists, and ready to open his veins and drink
      his own hot blood.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah!” he cried, “land of thirst! Well might you be called the land of
      despair!”
     </p>
    <p>
      At length he sank down in utter prostration, and his friends heard no
      other sound from him than the hissing of his breath between his parched
      and swollen lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      Toward evening, Joe had his turn of delirium. The vast expanse of sand
      appeared to him an immense pond, full of clear and limpid water; and, more
      than once, he dashed himself upon the scorching waste to drink long
      draughts, and rose again with his mouth clogged with hot dust.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Curses on it!” he yelled, in his madness, “it’s nothing but salt water!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then, while Ferguson and Kennedy lay there motionless, the resistless
      longing came over him to drain the last few drops of water that had been
      kept in reserve. The natural instinct proved too strong. He dragged
      himself toward the car, on his knees; he glared at the bottle containing
      the precious fluid; he gave one wild, eager glance, seized the treasured
      store, and bore it to his lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      At that instant he heard a heart-rending cry close beside him—“Water!
      water!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was Kennedy, who had crawled up close to him, and was begging there,
      upon his knees, and weeping piteously.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joe, himself in tears, gave the poor wretch the bottle, and Kennedy
      drained the last drop with savage haste.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Thanks!” he murmured hoarsely, but Joe did not hear him, for both alike
      had dropped fainting on the sand.
    </p>
    <p>
      What took place during that fearful night neither of them knew, but, on
      Tuesday morning, under those showers of heat which the sun poured down
      upon them, the unfortunate men felt their limbs gradually drying up, and
      when Joe attempted to rise he found it impossible.
    </p>
    <p>
      He looked around him. In the car, the doctor, completely overwhelmed, sat
      with his arms folded on his breast, gazing with idiotic fixedness upon
      some imaginary point in space. Kennedy was frightful to behold. He was
      rolling his head from right to left like a wild beast in a cage.
    </p>
    <p>
      All at once, his eyes rested on the butt of his rifle, which jutted above
      the rim of the car.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah!” he screamed, raising himself with a superhuman effort.
    </p>
    <p>
      Desperate, mad, he snatched at the weapon, and turned the barrel toward
      his mouth.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Kennedy!” shouted Joe, throwing himself upon his friend.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Let go! hands off!” moaned the Scot, in a hoarse, grating voice—and
      then the two struggled desperately for the rifle.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Let go, or I’ll kill you!” repeated Kennedy. But Joe clung to him only
      the more fiercely, and they had been contending thus without the doctor
      seeing them for many seconds, when, suddenly the rifle went off. At the
      sound of its discharge, the doctor rose up erect, like a spectre, and
      glared around him.
    </p>
    <p>
      But all at once his glance grew more animated; he extended his hand toward
      the horizon, and in a voice no longer human shrieked:
    </p>
    <p>
      “There! there—off there!”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was such fearful force in the cry that Kennedy and Joe released each
      other, and both looked where the doctor pointed.
    </p>
    <p>
      The plain was agitated like the sea shaken by the fury of a tempest;
      billows of sand went tossing over each other amid blinding clouds of dust;
      an immense pillar was seen whirling toward them through the air from the
      southeast, with terrific velocity; the sun was disappearing behind an
      opaque veil of cloud whose enormous barrier extended clear to the horizon,
      while the grains of fine sand went gliding together with all the supple
      ease of liquid particles, and the rising dust-tide gained more and more
      with every second.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ferguson’s eyes gleamed with a ray of energetic hope.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The simoom!” he exclaimed.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The simoom!” repeated Joe, without exactly knowing what it meant.
    </p>
    <p>
      “So much the better!” said Kennedy, with the bitterness of despair. “So
      much the better—we shall die!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “So much the better!” echoed the doctor, “for we shall live!” and, so
      saying, he began rapidly to throw out the sand that encumbered the car.
    </p>
    <p>
      At length his companions understood him, and took their places at his
      side.
    </p>
    <p>
      “And now, Joe,” said the doctor, “throw out some fifty pounds of your ore,
      there!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Joe no longer hesitated, although he still felt a fleeting pang of regret.
      The balloon at once began to ascend.
    </p>
    <p>
      “It was high time!” said the doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      The simoom, in fact, came rushing on like a thunderbolt, and a moment
      later the balloon would have been crushed, torn to atoms, annihilated. The
      awful whirlwind was almost upon it, and it was already pelted with showers
      of sand driven like hail by the storm.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Out with more ballast!” shouted the doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      “There!” responded Joe, tossing over a huge fragment of quartz.
    </p>
    <p>
      With this, the Victoria rose swiftly above the range of the whirling
      column, but, caught in the vast displacement of the atmosphere thereby
      occasioned, it was borne along with incalculable rapidity away above this
      foaming sea.
    </p>
    <p>
      The three travellers did not speak. They gazed, and hoped, and even felt
      refreshed by the breath of the tempest.
    </p>
    <p>
      About three o’clock, the whirlwind ceased; the sand, falling again upon
      the desert, formed numberless little hillocks, and the sky resumed its
      former tranquillity.
    </p>
    <p>
      The balloon, which had again lost its momentum, was floating in sight of
      an oasis, a sort of islet studded with green trees, thrown up upon the
      surface of this sandy ocean.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Water! we’ll find water there!” said the doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      And, instantly, opening the upper valve, he let some hydrogen escape, and
      slowly descended, taking the ground at about two hundred feet from the
      edge of the oasis.
    </p>
    <p>
      In four hours the travellers had swept over a distance of two hundred and
      forty miles!
    </p>
    <p>
      The car was at once ballasted, and Kennedy, closely followed by Joe,
      leaped out.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Take your guns with you!” said the doctor; “take your guns, and be
      careful!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Dick grasped his rifle, and Joe took one of the fowling-pieces. They then
      rapidly made for the trees, and disappeared under the fresh verdure, which
      announced the presence of abundant springs. As they hurried on, they had
      not taken notice of certain large footprints and fresh tracks of some
      living creature marked here and there in the damp soil.
    </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly, a dull roar was heard not twenty paces from them.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The roar of a lion!” said Joe.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Good for that!” said the excited hunter; “we’ll fight him. A man feels
      strong when only a fight’s in question.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But be careful, Mr. Kennedy; be careful! The lives of all depend upon the
      life of one.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But Kennedy no longer heard him; he was pushing on, his eye blazing; his
      rifle cocked; fearful to behold in his daring rashness. There, under a
      palm-tree, stood an enormous black-maned lion, crouching for a spring on
      his antagonist. Scarcely had he caught a glimpse of the hunter, when he
      bounded through the air; but he had not touched the ground ere a bullet
      pierced his heart, and he fell to the earth dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Hurrah! hurrah!” shouted Joe, with wild exultation.
    </p>
    <p>
      Kennedy rushed toward the well, slid down the dampened steps, and flung
      himself at full length by the side of a fresh spring, in which he plunged
      his parched lips. Joe followed suit, and for some minutes nothing was
      heard but the sound they made with their mouths, drinking more like
      maddened beasts than men.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Take care, Mr. Kennedy,” said Joe at last; “let us not overdo the thing!”
       and he panted for breath.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Kennedy, without a word, drank on. He even plunged his hands, and then
      his head, into the delicious tide—he fairly revelled in its
      coolness.
    </p>
    <p>
      “But the doctor?” said Joe; “our friend, Dr. Ferguson?”
     </p>
    <p>
      That one word recalled Kennedy to himself, and, hastily filling a flask
      that he had brought with him, he started on a run up the steps of the
      well.
    </p>
    <p>
      But what was his amazement when he saw an opaque body of enormous
      dimensions blocking up the passage! Joe, who was close upon Kennedy’s
      heels, recoiled with him.
    </p>
    <p>
      “We are blocked in—entrapped!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Impossible! What does that mean?—”
     </p>
    <p>
      Dick had no time to finish; a terrific roar made him only too quickly
      aware what foe confronted him.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Another lion!” exclaimed Joe.
    </p>
    <p>
      “A lioness, rather,” said Kennedy. “Ah! ferocious brute!” he added, “I’ll
      settle you in a moment more!” and swiftly reloaded his rifle.
    </p>
    <p>
      In another instant he fired, but the animal had disappeared.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Onward!” shouted Kennedy.
    </p>
    <p>
      “No!” interposed the other, “that shot did not kill her; her body would
      have rolled down the steps; she’s up there, ready to spring upon the first
      of us who appears, and he would be a lost man!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But what are we to do? We must get out of this, and the doctor is
      expecting us.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Let us decoy the animal. Take my piece, and give me your rifle.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What is your plan?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You’ll see.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And Joe, taking off his linen jacket, hung it on the end of the rifle, and
      thrust it above the top of the steps. The lioness flung herself furiously
      upon it. Kennedy was on the alert for her, and his bullet broke her
      shoulder. The lioness, with a frightful howl of agony, rolled down the
      steps, overturning Joe in her fall. The poor fellow imagined that he could
      already feel the enormous paws of the savage beast in his flesh, when a
      second detonation resounded in the narrow passage, and Dr. Ferguson
      appeared at the opening above with his gun in hand, and still smoking from
      the discharge.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joe leaped to his feet, clambered over the body of the dead lioness, and
      handed up the flask full of sparkling water to his master.
    </p>
    <p>
      To carry it to his lips, and to half empty it at a draught, was the work
      of an instant, and the three travellers offered up thanks from the depths
      of their hearts to that Providence who had so miraculously saved them.
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
