<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Twelfth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>Twelfth</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Crossing the Strait.⁠—The Mrima.⁠—Dick’s Remark and Joe’s
 Proposition.⁠—A Recipe for Coffee-making.⁠—The Uzaramo.⁠—The
 Unfortunate Maizan.⁠—Mount Dathumi.⁠—The Doctor’s Cards.⁠—Night
 under a Nopal.
 </p>
			</header>
 <p>
 The air was pure, the wind moderate, and the balloon ascended almost
 perpendicularly to a height of fifteen hundred feet, as indicated by a
 depression of two inches in the barometric column.
 </p>
 <p>
 At this height a more decided current carried the balloon toward the
 southwest. What a magnificent spectacle was then outspread beneath the
 gaze of the travellers! The island of Zanzibar could be seen in its entire
 extent, marked out by its deeper color upon a vast planisphere; the fields
 had the appearance of patterns of different colors, and thick clumps of
 green indicated the groves and thickets.
 </p>
 <p>
 The inhabitants of the island looked no larger than insects. The huzzaing
 and shouting were little by little lost in the distance, and only the
 discharge of the ship’s guns could be heard in the concavity beneath the
 balloon, as the latter sped on its flight.
 </p>
 <p>
 “How fine that is!” said Joe, breaking silence for the first time.
 </p>
 <p>
 He got no reply. The doctor was busy observing the variations of the
 barometer and noting down the details of his ascent.
 </p>
 <p>
 Kennedy looked on, and had not eyes enough to take in all that he saw.
 </p>
 <p>
 The rays of the sun coming to the aid of the heating cylinder, the tension
 of the gas increased, and the Victoria attained the height of twenty-five
 hundred feet.
 </p>
 <p>
 The <i>Resolute</i> looked like a mere cockleshell, and the African coast could
 be distinctly seen in the west marked out by a fringe of foam.
 </p>
 <p>
 “You don’t talk?” said Joe, again.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We are looking!” said the doctor, directing his spyglass toward the
 mainland.
 </p>
 <p>
 “For my part, I must talk!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “As much as you please, Joe; talk as much as you like!”
 </p>
 <p>
 And Joe went on alone with a tremendous volley of exclamations. The “ohs!”
 and the “ahs!” exploded one after the other, incessantly, from his lips.
 </p>
 <p>
 During his passage over the sea the doctor deemed it best to keep at his
 present elevation. He could thus reconnoitre a greater stretch of the
 coast. The thermometer and the barometer, hanging up inside of the
 half-opened awning, were always within sight, and a second barometer
 suspended outside was to serve during the night watches.
 </p>
 <p>
 At the end of about two hours the Victoria, driven along at a speed of a
 little more than eight miles, very visibly neared the coast of the
 mainland. The doctor, thereupon, determined to descend a little nearer to
 the ground. So he moderated the flame of his cylinder, and the balloon, in
 a few moments, had descended to an altitude only three hundred feet above
 the soil.
 </p>
 <p>
 It was then found to be passing just over the Mrima country, the name of
 this part of the eastern coast of Africa. Dense borders of mango-trees
 protected its margin, and the ebb-tide disclosed to view their thick
 roots, chafed and gnawed by the teeth of the Indian Ocean. The sands
 which, at an earlier period, formed the coastline, rounded away along the
 distant horizon, and Mount Nguru reared aloft its sharp summit in the
 northwest.
 </p>
 <p>
 The Victoria passed near to a village which the doctor found marked upon
 his chart as Kaole. Its entire population had assembled in crowds, and
 were yelling with anger and fear, at the same time vainly directing their
 arrows against this monster of the air that swept along so majestically
 away above all their powerless fury.
 </p>
 <p>
 The wind was setting to the southward, but the doctor felt no concern on
 that score, since it enabled him the better to follow the route traced by
 Captains Burton and Speke.
 </p>
 <p>
 Kennedy had, at length, become as talkative as Joe, and the two kept up a
 continual interchange of admiring interjections and exclamations.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Out upon stagecoaches!” said one.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Steamers indeed!” said the other.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Railroads! eh? rubbish!” put in Kennedy, “that you travel on, without
 seeing the country!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Balloons! they’re the sort for me!” Joe would add. “Why, you don’t feel
 yourself going, and Nature takes the trouble to spread herself out before
 one’s eyes!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “What a splendid sight! What a spectacle! What a delight! a dream in a
 hammock!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Suppose we take our breakfast?” was Joe’s unpoetical change of tune, at
 last, for the keen, open air had mightily sharpened his appetite.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Good idea, my boy!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh! it won’t take us long to do the cooking⁠—biscuit and potted
 meat?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And as much coffee as you like,” said the doctor. “I give you leave to
 borrow a little heat from my cylinder. There’s enough and to spare, for
 that matter, and so we shall avoid the risk of a conflagration.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “That would be a dreadful misfortune!” ejaculated Kennedy. “It’s the same
 as a powder-magazine suspended over our heads.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Not precisely,” said Ferguson, “but still if the gas were to take fire it
 would burn up gradually, and we should settle down on the ground, which
 would be disagreeable; but never fear⁠—our balloon is hermetically
 sealed.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Let us eat a bite, then,” replied Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Now, gentlemen,” put in Joe, “while doing the same as you, I’m going to
 get you up a cup of coffee that I think you’ll have something to say
 about.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “The fact is,” added the doctor, “that Joe, along with a thousand other
 virtues, has a remarkable talent for the preparation of that delicious
 beverage: he compounds it of a mixture of various origin, but he never
 would reveal to me the ingredients.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, master, since we are so far aboveground, I can tell you the
 secret. It is just to mix equal quantities of Mocha, of Bourbon coffee,
 and of Rio Nunez.”
 </p>
 <p>
 A few moments later, three steaming cups of coffee were served, and topped
 off a substantial breakfast, which was additionally seasoned by the jokes
 and repartees of the guests. Each one then resumed his post of
 observation.
 </p>
 <p>
 The country over which they were passing was remarkable for its fertility.
 Narrow, winding paths plunged in beneath the overarching verdure. They
 swept along above cultivated fields of tobacco, maize, and barley, at full
 maturity, and here and there immense rice-fields, full of straight stalks
 and purple blossoms. They could distinguish sheep and goats too, confined
 in large cages, set up on piles to keep them out of reach of the leopards’ 
 fangs. Luxuriant vegetation spread in wild profuseness over this prodigal
 soil.
 </p>
 <p>
 Village after village rang with yells of terror and astonishment at the
 sight of the Victoria, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson prudently kept her above the reach
 of the barbarian arrows. The savages below, thus baffled, ran together
 from their huddle of huts and followed the travellers with their vain
 imprecations while they remained in sight.
 </p>
 <p>
 At noon, the doctor, upon consulting his map, calculated that they were
 passing over the Uzaramo* country. The soil was thickly studded with
 coconut, papaw, and cottonwood trees, above which the balloon seemed to
 disport itself like a bird. Joe found this splendid vegetation a matter of
 course, seeing that they were in Africa. Kennedy descried some hares and
 quails that asked nothing better than to get a good shot from his
 fowling-piece, but it would have been powder wasted, since there was no
 time to pick up the game.
 </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 * U and Ou signify country in the language of that region.
</pre>
 <p>
 The aeronauts swept on with the speed of twelve miles per hour, and soon
 were passing in thirty-eight degrees twenty minutes east longitude, over
 the village of Tounda.
 </p>
 <p>
 “It was there,” said the doctor, “that Burton and Speke were seized with
 violent fevers, and for a moment thought their expedition ruined. And yet
 they were only a short distance from the coast, but fatigue and privation
 were beginning to tell upon them severely.”
 </p>
 <p>
 In fact, there is a perpetual malaria reigning throughout the country in
 question. Even the doctor could hope to escape its effects only by rising
 above the range of the miasma that exhales from this damp region whence
 the blazing rays of the sun pump up its poisonous vapors. Once in a while
 they could descry a caravan resting in a <i>kraal</i>, awaiting the freshness
 and cool of the evening to resume its route. These kraals are wide patches
 of cleared land, surrounded by hedges and jungles, where traders take
 shelter against not only the wild beasts, but also the robber tribes of
 the country. They could see the natives running and scattering in all
 directions at the sight of the Victoria. Kennedy was keen to get a closer
 look at them, but the doctor invariably held out against the idea.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The chiefs are armed with muskets,” he said, “and our balloon would be
 too conspicuous a mark for their bullets.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Would a bullet-hole bring us down?” asked Joe.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Not immediately; but such a hole would soon become a large torn orifice
 through which our gas would escape.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Then, let us keep at a respectful distance from yon miscreants. What must
 they think as they see us sailing in the air? I’m sure they must feel like
 worshipping us!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Let them worship away, then,” replied the doctor, “but at a distance.
 There is no harm done in getting as far away from them as possible. See!
 the country is already changing its aspect: the villages are fewer and
 farther between; the mango-trees have disappeared, for their growth ceases
 at this latitude. The soil is becoming hilly and portends mountains not
 far off.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Yes,” said Kennedy, “it seems to me that I can see some high land on this
 side.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “In the west⁠—those are the nearest ranges of the Ourizara⁠—Mount
 Duthumi, no doubt, behind which I hope to find shelter for the night. I’ll
 stir up the heat in the cylinder a little, for we must keep at an
 elevation of five or six hundred feet.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “That was a grant idea of yours, sir,” said Joe. “It’s mighty easy to
 manage it; you turn a cock, and the thing’s done.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Ah! here we are more at our ease,” said the sportsman, as the balloon
 ascended; “the reflection of the sun on those red sands was getting to be
 insupportable.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “What splendid trees!” cried Joe. “They’re quite natural, but they are
 very fine! Why a dozen of them would make a forest!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Those are baobabs,” replied <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson. “See, there’s one with a trunk
 fully one hundred feet in circumference. It was, perhaps, at the foot of
 that very tree that Maizan, the French traveller, expired in 1845, for we
 are over the village of Deje-la-Mhora, to which he pushed on alone. He was
 seized by the chief of this region, fastened to the foot of a baobab, and
 the ferocious black then severed all his joints while the war-song of his
 tribe was chanted; he then made a gash in the prisoner’s neck, stopped to
 sharpen his knife, and fairly tore away the poor wretch’s head before it
 had been cut from the body. The unfortunate Frenchman was but twenty-six
 years of age.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And France has never avenged so hideous a crime?” said Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “France did demand satisfaction, and the Said of Zanzibar did all in his
 power to capture the murderer, but in vain.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I move that we don’t stop here!” urged Joe; “let us go up, master, let us
 go up higher by all means.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “All the more willingly, Joe, that there is Mount Duthumi right ahead of
 us. If my calculations be right we shall have passed it before seven
 o’clock in the evening.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Shall we not travel at night?” asked the Scotchman.
 </p>
 <p>
 “No, as little as possible. With care and vigilance we might do so safely,
 but it is not enough to sweep across Africa. We want to see it.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Up to this time we have nothing to complain of, master. The best
 cultivated and most fertile country in the world instead of a desert!
 Believe the geographers after that!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Let us wait, Joe! we shall see by-and-by.”
 </p>
 <p>
 About half-past six in the evening the Victoria was directly opposite
 Mount Duthumi; in order to pass, it had to ascend to a height of more than
 three thousand feet, and to accomplish that the doctor had only to raise
 the temperature of his gas eighteen degrees. It might have been correctly
 said that he held his balloon in his hand. Kennedy had only to indicate to
 him the obstacles to be surmounted, and the Victoria sped through the air,
 skimming the summits of the range.
 </p>
 <p>
 At eight o’clock it descended the farther slope, the acclivity of which
 was much less abrupt. The anchors were thrown out from the car and one of
 them, coming in contact with the branches of an enormous nopal, caught on
 it firmly. Joe at once let himself slide down the rope and secured it. The
 silk ladder was then lowered to him and he remounted to the car with
 agility. The balloon now remained perfectly at rest sheltered from the
 eastern winds.
 </p>
 <p>
 The evening meal was got ready, and the aeronauts, excited by their day’s
 journey, made a heavy onslaught upon the provisions.
 </p>
 <p>
 “What distance have we traversed today?” asked Kennedy, disposing of some
 alarming mouthfuls.
 </p>
 <p>
 The doctor took his bearings, by means of lunar observations, and
 consulted the excellent map that he had with him for his guidance. It
 belonged to the Atlas of <i xml:lang="de">Der Neuester Endeckungen in Afrika</i> (“The Latest
 Discoveries in Africa”), published at Gotha by his learned friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Petermann, and by that savant sent to him. This Atlas was to serve the
 doctor on his whole journey; for it contained the itinerary of Burton and
 Speke to the great lakes; the Sudan, according to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barth; the Lower
 Senegal, according to Guillaume Lejean; and the Delta of the Niger, by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blaikie.
 </p>
 <p>
 Ferguson had also provided himself with a work which combined in one
 compilation all the notions already acquired concerning the Nile. It was
 entitled <i>The Sources of the Nile; being a General Survey of the Basin of
 that River and of its Headstream, with the History of the Nilotic
 Discovery</i>, by Charles Beke, D.D.
 </p>
 <p>
 He also had the excellent charts published in the <i>Bulletins of the
 Geographical Society of London</i>; and not a single point of the countries
 already discovered could, therefore, escape his notice.
 </p>
 <p>
 Upon tracing on his maps, he found that his latitudinal route had been two
 degrees, or one hundred and twenty miles, to the westward.
 </p>
 <p>
 Kennedy remarked that the route tended toward the south; but this
 direction was satisfactory to the doctor, who desired to reconnoitre the
 tracks of his predecessors as much as possible. It was agreed that the
 night should be divided into three watches, so that each of the party
 should take his turn in watching over the safety of the rest. The doctor
 took the watch commencing at nine o’clock; Kennedy, the one commencing at
 midnight; and Joe, the three o’clock morning watch.
 </p>
 <p>
 So Kennedy and Joe, well wrapped in their blankets, stretched themselves
 at full length under the awning, and slept quietly; while <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson
 kept on the lookout.
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
