<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Thirty-First</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>Thirty-First</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Departure in the Nighttime.⁠—All Three.⁠—Kennedy’s Instincts.⁠—Precautions.⁠—The
 Course of the Shari River.⁠—Lake Tchad.⁠—The Water of the Lake.⁠—The
 Hippopotamus.⁠—One Bullet thrown away.
 </p>
			</header>
 <p>
 About three o’clock in the morning, Joe, who was then on watch, at length
 saw the city move away from beneath his feet. The <i>Victoria</i> was once again
 in motion, and both the doctor and Kennedy awoke.
 </p>
 <p>
 The former consulted his compass, and saw, with satisfaction, that the
 wind was carrying them toward the north-northeast.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We are in luck!” said he; “every thing works in our favor: we shall
 discover Lake Tchad this very day.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Is it a broad sheet of water?” asked Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Somewhat, Dick. At its greatest length and breadth, it measures about one
 hundred and twenty miles.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It will spice our trip with a little variety to sail over a spacious
 sheet of water.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “After all, though, I don’t see that we have much to complain of on that
 score. Our trip has been very much varied, indeed; and, moreover, we are
 getting on under the best possible conditions.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Unquestionably so; excepting those privations on the desert, we have
 encountered no serious danger.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It is not to be denied that our noble balloon has behaved wonderfully
 well. Today is May 12th, and we started on the 18th of April. That makes
 twenty-five days of journeying. In ten days more we shall have reached our
 destination.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Where is that?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I do not know. But what does that signify?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “You are right again, Samuel! Let us entrust to Providence the care of
 guiding us and of keeping us in good health as we are now. We don’t look
 much as though we had been crossing the most pestilential country in the
 world!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “We had an opportunity of getting up in life, and that’s what we have
 done!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Hurrah for trips in the air!” cried Joe. “Here we are at the end of
 twenty-five days in good condition, well fed, and well rested. We’ve had
 too much rest in fact, for my legs begin to feel rusty, and I wouldn’t be
 vexed a bit to stretch them with a run of thirty miles or so!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “You can do that, Joe, in the streets of London, but in fine we set out
 three together, like Denham, Clapperton, and Overweg; like Barth,
 Richardson, and Vogel, and, more fortunate than our predecessors here, we
 are three in number still. But it is most important for us not to
 separate. If, while one of us was on the ground, the <i>Victoria</i> should have
 to ascend in order to escape some sudden danger, who knows whether we
 should ever see each other again? Therefore it is that I say again to
 Kennedy frankly that I do not like his going off alone to hunt.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But still, Samuel, you will permit me to indulge that fancy a little.
 There is no harm in renewing our stock of provisions. Besides, before our
 departure, you held out to me the prospect of some superb hunting, and
 thus far I have done but little in the line of the Andersons and
 Cummings.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But, my dear Dick, your memory fails you, or your modesty makes you
 forget your own exploits. It really seems to me that, without mentioning
 small game, you have already an antelope, an elephant, and two lions on
 your conscience.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But what’s all that to an African sportsman who sees all the animals in
 creation strutting along under the muzzle of his rifle? There! there! look
 at that troop of giraffes!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Those giraffes,” roared Joe; “why, they’re not as big as my fist.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Because we are a thousand feet above them; but close to them you would
 discover that they are three times as tall as you are!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And what do you say to yon herd of gazelles, and those ostriches, that
 run with the speed of the wind?” resumed Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Those ostriches?” remonstrated Joe, again; “those are chickens, and the
 greatest kind of chickens!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Come, doctor, can’t we get down nearer to them?” pleaded Kennedy.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We can get closer to them, Dick, but we must not land. And what good will
 it do you to strike down those poor animals when they can be of no use to
 you? Now, if the question were to destroy a lion, a tiger, a cat, a hyena,
 I could understand it; but to deprive an antelope or a gazelle of life, to
 no other purpose than the gratification of your instincts as a sportsman,
 seems hardly worth the trouble. But, after all, my friend, we are going to
 keep at about one hundred feet only from the soil, and, should you see any
 ferocious wild beast, oblige us by sending a ball through its heart!”
 </p>
 <p>
 The <i>Victoria</i> descended gradually, but still keeping at a safe height, for,
 in a barbarous, yet very populous country, it was necessary to keep on the
 watch for unexpected perils.
 </p>
 <p>
 The travellers were then directly following the course of the Shari. The
 charming banks of this river were hidden beneath the foliage of trees of
 various dyes; lianas and climbing plants wound in and out on all sides and
 formed the most curious combinations of color. Crocodiles were seen
 basking in the broad blaze of the sun or plunging beneath the waters with
 the agility of lizards, and in their gambols they sported about among the
 many green islands that intercept the current of the stream.
 </p>
 <p>
 It was thus, in the midst of rich and verdant landscapes that our
 travellers passed over the district of Maffatay, and about nine o’clock in
 the morning reached the southern shore of Lake Tchad.
 </p>
 <p>
 There it was at last, outstretched before them, that Caspian Sea of
 Africa, the existence of which was so long consigned to the realms of
 fable⁠—that interior expanse of water to which only Denham’s and
 Barth’s expeditions had been able to force their way.
 </p>
 <p>
 The doctor strove in vain to fix its precise configuration upon paper. It
 had already changed greatly since 1847. In fact, the chart of Lake Tchad
 is very difficult to trace with exactitude, for it is surrounded by muddy
 and almost impassable morasses, in which Barth thought that he was doomed
 to perish. From year to year these marshes, covered with reeds and papyrus
 fifteen feet high, become the lake itself. Frequently, too, the villages
 on its shores are half submerged, as was the case with Ngornou in 1856,
 and now the hippopotamus and the alligator frisk and dive where the
 dwellings of Bornou once stood.
 </p>
 <p>
 The sun shot his dazzling rays over this placid sheet of water, and toward
 the north the two elements merged into one and the same horizon.
 </p>
 <p>
 The doctor was desirous of determining the character of the water, which
 was long believed to be salt. There was no danger in descending close to
 the lake, and the car was soon skimming its surface like a bird at the
 distance of only five feet.
 </p>
 <p>
 Joe plunged a bottle into the lake and drew it up half filled. The water
 was then tasted and found to be but little fit for drinking, with a
 certain carbonate-of-soda flavor.
 </p>
 <p>
 While the doctor was jotting down the result of this experiment, the loud
 report of a gun was heard close beside him. Kennedy had not been able to
 resist the temptation of firing at a huge hippopotamus. The latter, who
 had been basking quietly, disappeared at the sound of the explosion, but
 did not seem to be otherwise incommoded by Kennedy’s conical bullet.
 </p>
 <p>
 “You’d have done better if you had harpooned him,” said Joe.
 </p>
 <p>
 “But how?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “With one of our anchors. It would have been a hook just big enough for
 such a rousing beast as that!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Humph!” ejaculated Kennedy, “Joe really has an idea this time⁠—”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Which I beg of you not to put into execution,” interposed the doctor.
 “The animal would very quickly have dragged us where we could not have
 done much to help ourselves, and where we have no business to be.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Especially now since we’ve settled the question as to what kind of water
 there is in Lake Tchad. Is that sort of fish good to eat, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “That fish, as you call it, Joe, is really a mammiferous animal of the
 pachydermal species. Its flesh is said to be excellent and is an article
 of important trade between the tribes living along the borders of the
 lake.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Then I’m sorry that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennedy’s shot didn’t do more damage.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “The animal is vulnerable only in the stomach and between the thighs.
 Dick’s ball hasn’t even marked him; but should the ground strike me as
 favorable, we shall halt at the northern end of the lake, where Kennedy
 will find himself in the midst of a whole menagerie, and can make up for
 lost time.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well,” said Joe, “I hope then that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennedy will hunt the hippopotamus
 a little; I’d like to taste the meat of that queer-looking beast. It
 doesn’t look exactly natural to get away into the centre of Africa, to
 feed on snipe and partridge, just as if we were in England.”
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
