<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Twentieth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>Twentieth</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Celestial Bottle.⁠—The Fig-Palms.⁠—The Mammoth Trees.⁠—The
 Tree of War.⁠—The Winged Team.⁠—Two Native Tribes in Battle.⁠—A
 Massacre.⁠—An Intervention from above.
 </p>
			</header>
 <p>
 The wind had become violent and irregular; the balloon was running the
 gantlet through the air. Tossed at one moment toward the north, at another
 toward the south, it could not find one steady current.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We are moving very swiftly without advancing much,” said Kennedy,
 remarking the frequent oscillations of the needle of the compass.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The balloon is rushing at the rate of at least thirty miles an hour. Lean
 over, and see how the country is gliding away beneath us!” said the
 doctor.
 </p>
 <p>
 “See! that forest looks as though it were precipitating itself upon us!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “The forest has become a clearing!” added the other.
 </p>
 <p>
 “And the clearing a village!” continued Joe, a moment or two later. “Look
 at the faces of those astonished darkys!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh! it’s natural enough that they should be astonished,” said the doctor.
 “The French peasants, when they first saw a balloon, fired at it, thinking
 that it was an aerial monster. A Sudan negro may be excused, then, for
 opening his eyes <em>very</em> wide!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Faith!” said Joe, as the <i>Victoria</i> skimmed closely along the ground, at
 scarcely the elevation of one hundred feet, and immediately over a
 village, “I’ll throw them an empty bottle, with your leave, doctor, and if
 it reaches them safe and sound, they’ll worship it; if it breaks, they’ll
 make talismans of the pieces.”
 </p>
 <p>
 So saying, he flung out a bottle, which, of course, was broken into a
 thousand fragments, while the negroes scampered into their round huts,
 uttering shrill cries.
 </p>
 <p>
 A little farther on, Kennedy called out: “Look at that strange tree! The
 upper part is of one kind and the lower part of another!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well!” said Joe, “here’s a country where the trees grow on top of each
 other.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It’s simply the trunk of a fig-tree,” replied the doctor, “on which there
 is a little vegetating earth. Some fine day, the wind left the seed of a
 palm on it, and the seed has taken root and grown as though it were on the
 plain ground.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “A fine new style of gardening,” said Joe, “and I’ll import the idea to
 England. It would be just the thing in the London parks; without counting
 that it would be another way to increase the number of fruit-trees. We
 could have gardens up in the air; and the small house-owners would like
 that!”
 </p>
 <p>
 At this moment, they had to raise the balloon so as to pass over a forest
 of trees that were more than three hundred feet in height⁠—a kind of
 ancient banyan.
 </p>
 <p>
 “What magnificent trees!” exclaimed Kennedy. “I never saw any thing so
 fine as the appearance of these venerable forests. Look, doctor!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “The height of these banyans is really remarkable, my dear Dick; and yet,
 they would be nothing astonishing in the New World.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Why, are there still loftier trees in existence?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Undoubtedly; among the ‘mammoth trees’ of California, there is a cedar
 four hundred and eighty feet in height. It would overtop the Houses of
 Parliament, and even the Great Pyramid of Egypt. The trunk at the surface
 of the ground was one hundred and twenty feet in circumference, and the
 concentric layers of the wood disclosed an age of more than four thousand
 years.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But then, sir, there was nothing wonderful in it! When one has lived four
 thousand years, one ought to be pretty tall!” was Joe’s remark.
 </p>
 <p>
 Meanwhile, during the doctor’s recital and Joe’s response, the forest had
 given place to a large collection of huts surrounding an open space. In
 the middle of this grew a solitary tree, and Joe exclaimed, as he caught
 sight of it:
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well! if that tree has produced such flowers as those, for the last four
 thousand years, I have to offer it my compliments, anyhow,” and he pointed
 to a gigantic sycamore, whose whole trunk was covered with human bones.
 The flowers of which Joe spoke were heads freshly severed from the bodies,
 and suspended by daggers thrust into the bark of the tree.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The war-tree of these cannibals!” said the doctor; “the Indians merely
 carry off the scalp, but these negroes take the whole head.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “A mere matter of fashion!” said Joe. But, already, the village and the
 bleeding heads were disappearing on the horizon. Another place offered a
 still more revolting spectacle⁠—half-devoured corpses; skeletons
 mouldering to dust; human limbs scattered here and there, and left to feed
 the jackals and hyenas.
 </p>
 <p>
 “No doubt, these are the bodies of criminals; according to the custom in
 Abyssinia, these people have left them a prey to the wild beasts, who kill
 them with their terrible teeth and claws, and then devour them at their
 leisure.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Not a whit more cruel than hanging!” said the Scot; “filthier, that’s
 all!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “In the southern regions of Africa, they content themselves,” resumed the
 doctor, “with shutting up the criminal in his own hut with his cattle, and
 sometimes with his family. They then set fire to the hut, and the whole
 party are burned together. I call that cruel; but, like friend Kennedy, I
 think that the gallows is quite as cruel, quite as barbarous.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Joe, by the aid of his keen sight, which he did not fail to use
 continually, noticed some flocks of birds of prey flitting about the
 horizon.
 </p>
 <p>
 “They are eagles!” exclaimed Kennedy, after reconnoitring them through the
 glass, “magnificent birds, whose flight is as rapid as ours.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Heaven preserve us from their attacks!” said the doctor, “they are more
 to be feared by us than wild beasts or savage tribes.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Bah!” said the hunter, “we can drive them off with a few rifle-shots.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Nevertheless, I would prefer, dear Dick, not having to rely upon your
 skill, this time, for the silk of our balloon could not resist their sharp
 beaks; fortunately, the huge birds will, I believe, be more frightened
 than attracted by our machine.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Yes! but a new idea, and I have dozens of them,” said Joe; “if we could
 only manage to capture a team of live eagles, we could hitch them to the
 balloon, and they’d haul us through the air!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “The thing has been seriously proposed,” replied the doctor, “but I think
 it hardly practicable with creatures naturally so restive.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh! we’d tame them,” said Joe. “Instead of driving them with bits, we’d
 do it with eye-blinkers that would cover their eyes. Half blinded in that
 way, they’d go to the right or to the left, as we desired; when blinded
 completely, they would stop.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Allow me, Joe, to prefer a favorable wind to your team of eagles. It
 costs less for fodder, and is more reliable.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, you may have your choice, master, but I stick to my idea.”
 </p>
 <p>
 It now was noon. The <i>Victoria</i> had been going at a more moderate speed for
 some time; the country merely passed below it; it no longer flew.
 </p>
 <p>
 Suddenly, shouts and whistlings were heard by our aeronauts, and, leaning
 over the edge of the car, they saw on the open plain below them an
 exciting spectacle.
 </p>
 <p>
 Two hostile tribes were fighting furiously, and the air was dotted with
 volleys of arrows. The combatants were so intent upon their murderous work
 that they did not notice the arrival of the balloon; there were about
 three hundred mingled confusedly in the deadly struggle: most of them, red
 with the blood of the wounded, in which they fairly wallowed, were
 horrible to behold.
 </p>
 <p>
 As they at last caught sight of the balloon, there was a momentary pause;
 but their yells redoubled, and some arrows were shot at the <i>Victoria</i>, one
 of them coming close enough for Joe to catch it with his hand.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Let us rise out of range,” exclaimed the doctor; “there must be no
 rashness! We are forbidden any risk.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Meanwhile, the massacre continued on both sides, with battle-axes and
 war-clubs; as quickly as one of the combatants fell, a hostile warrior ran
 up to cut off his head, while the women, mingling in the fray, gathered up
 these bloody trophies, and piled them together at either extremity of the
 battlefield. Often, too, they even fought for these hideous spoils.
 </p>
 <p>
 “What a frightful scene!” said Kennedy, with profound disgust.
 </p>
 <p>
 “They’re ugly acquaintances!” added Joe; “but then, if they had uniforms
 they’d be just like the fighters of all the rest of the world!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I have a keen hankering to take a hand in at that fight,” said the
 hunter, brandishing his rifle.
 </p>
 <p>
 “No! no!” objected the doctor, vehemently; “no, let us not meddle with
 what don’t concern us. Do you know which is right or which is wrong, that
 you would assume the part of the Almighty? Let us, rather, hurry away from
 this revolting spectacle. Could the great captains of the world float thus
 above the scenes of their exploits, they would at last, perhaps, conceive
 a disgust for blood and conquest.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The chieftain of one of the contending parties was remarkable for his
 athletic proportions, his great height, and herculean strength. With one
 hand he plunged his spear into the compact ranks of his enemies, and with
 the other mowed large spaces in them with his battle-axe. Suddenly he
 flung away his war-club, red with blood, rushed upon a wounded warrior,
 and, chopping off his arm at a single stroke, carried the dissevered
 member to his mouth, and bit it again and again.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Ah!” ejaculated Kennedy, “the horrible brute! I can hold back no longer,”
 and, as he spoke, the huge savage, struck full in the forehead with a
 rifle-ball, fell headlong to the ground.
 </p>
 <p>
 Upon this sudden mishap of their leader, his warriors seemed struck dumb
 with amazement; his supernatural death awed them, while it reanimated the
 courage and ardor of their adversaries, and, in a twinkling, the field was
 abandoned by half the combatants.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Come, let us look higher up for a current to bear us away. I am sick of
 this spectacle,” said the doctor.
 </p>
 <p>
 But they could not get away so rapidly as to avoid the sight of the
 victorious tribe rushing upon the dead and the wounded, scrambling and
 disputing for the still warm and reeking flesh, and eagerly devouring it.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Faugh!” uttered Joe, “it’s sickening.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The balloon rose as it expanded; the howlings of the brutal horde, in the
 delirium of their orgy, pursued them for a few minutes; but, at length,
 borne away toward the south, they were carried out of sight and hearing of
 this horrible spectacle of cannibalism.
 </p>
 <p>
 The surface of the country was now greatly varied, with numerous streams
 of water, bearing toward the east. The latter, undoubtedly, ran into those
 affluents of Lake Nu, or of the River of the Gazelles, concerning which M.
 Guillaume Lejean has given such curious details.
 </p>
 <p>
 At nightfall, the balloon cast anchor in twenty-seven degrees east
 longitude, and four degrees twenty minutes north latitude, after a day’s
 trip of one hundred and fifty miles.
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
