<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      CHAPTER TWENTY-SIXTH.
    </h2>
    <p>
      One Hundred and Thirteen Degrees.—The Doctor’s Reflections.—A
      Desperate Search.—The Cylinder goes out.—One Hundred and
      Twenty-two Degrees.—Contemplation of the Desert.—A Night Walk.—Solitude.—Debility.—Joe’s
      Prospects.—He gives himself One Day more.
    </p>
    <p>
      The distance made by the balloon during the preceding day did not exceed
      ten miles, and, to keep it afloat, one hundred and sixty-two cubic feet of
      gas had been consumed.
    </p>
    <p>
      On Saturday morning the doctor again gave the signal for departure.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The cylinder can work only six hours longer; and, if in that time we
      shall not have found either a well or a spring of water, God alone knows
      what will become of us!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Not much wind this morning, master,” said Joe; “but it will come up,
      perhaps,” he added, suddenly remarking the doctor’s ill-concealed
      depression.
    </p>
    <p>
      Vain hope! The atmosphere was in a dead calm—one of those calms
      which hold vessels captive in tropical seas. The heat had become
      intolerable; and the thermometer, in the shade under the awning, indicated
      one hundred and thirteen degrees.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joe and Kennedy, reclining at full length near each other, tried, if not
      in slumber, at least in torpor, to forget their situation, for their
      forced inactivity gave them periods of leisure far from pleasant. That man
      is to be pitied the most who cannot wean himself from gloomy reflections
      by actual work, or some practical pursuit. But here there was nothing to
      look after, nothing to undertake, and they had to submit to the situation,
      without having it in their power to ameliorate it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The pangs of thirst began to be severely felt; brandy, far from appeasing
      this imperious necessity, augmented it, and richly merited the name of
      “tiger’s milk” applied to it by the African natives. Scarcely two pints of
      water remained, and that was heated. Each of the party devoured the few
      precious drops with his gaze, yet neither of them dared to moisten his
      lips with them. Two pints of water in the midst of the desert!
    </p>
    <p>
      Then it was that Dr. Ferguson, buried in meditation, asked himself whether
      he had acted with prudence. Would he not have done better to have kept the
      water that he had decomposed in pure loss, in order to sustain him in the
      air? He had gained a little distance, to be sure; but was he any nearer to
      his journey’s end? What difference did sixty miles to the rear make in
      this region, when there was no water to be had where they were? The wind,
      should it rise, would blow there as it did here, only less strongly at
      this point, if it came from the east. But hope urged him onward. And yet
      those two gallons of water, expended in vain, would have sufficed for nine
      days’ halt in the desert. And what changes might not have occurred in nine
      days! Perhaps, too, while retaining the water, he might have ascended by
      throwing out ballast, at the cost merely of discharging some gas, when he
      had again to descend. But the gas in his balloon was his blood, his very
      life!
    </p>
    <p>
      A thousand one such reflections whirled in succession through his brain;
      and, resting his head between his hands, he sat there for hours without
      raising it.
    </p>
    <p>
      “We must make one final effort,” he said, at last, about ten o’clock in
      the morning. “We must endeavor, just once more, to find an atmospheric
      current to bear us away from here, and, to that end, must risk our last
      resources.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Therefore, while his companions slept, the doctor raised the hydrogen in
      the balloon to an elevated temperature, and the huge globe, filling out by
      the dilation of the gas, rose straight up in the perpendicular rays of the
      sun. The doctor searched vainly for a breath of wind, from the height of
      one hundred feet to that of five miles; his starting-point remained
      fatally right below him, and absolute calm seemed to reign, up to the
      extreme limits of the breathing atmosphere.
    </p>
    <p>
      At length the feeding-supply of water gave out; the cylinder was
      extinguished for lack of gas; the Buntzen battery ceased to work, and the
      balloon, shrinking together, gently descended to the sand, in the very
      place that the car had hollowed out there.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was noon; and solar observations gave nineteen degrees thirty-five
      minutes east longitude, and six degrees fifty-one minutes north latitude,
      or nearly five hundred miles from Lake Tchad, and more than four hundred
      miles from the western coast of Africa.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the balloon taking ground, Kennedy and Joe awoke from their stupor.
    </p>
    <p>
      “We have halted,” said the Scot.
    </p>
    <p>
      “We had to do so,” replied the doctor, gravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      His companions understood him. The level of the soil at that point
      corresponded with the level of the sea, and, consequently, the balloon
      remained in perfect equilibrium, and absolutely motionless.
    </p>
    <p>
      The weight of the three travellers was replaced with an equivalent
      quantity of sand, and they got out of the car. Each was absorbed in his
      own thoughts; and for many hours neither of them spoke. Joe prepared their
      evening meal, which consisted of biscuit and pemmican, and was hardly
      tasted by either of the party. A mouthful of scalding water from their
      little store completed this gloomy repast.
    </p>
    <p>
      During the night none of them kept awake; yet none could be precisely said
      to have slept. On the morrow there remained only half a pint of water, and
      this the doctor put away, all three having resolved not to touch it until
      the last extremity.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not long, however, before Joe exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      “I’m choking, and the heat is getting worse! I’m not surprised at that,
      though,” he added, consulting the thermometer; “one hundred and forty
      degrees!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The sand scorches me,” said the hunter, “as though it had just come out
      of a furnace; and not a cloud in this sky of fire. It’s enough to drive
      one mad!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Let us not despair,” responded the doctor. “In this latitude these
      intense heats are invariably followed by storms, and the latter come with
      the suddenness of lightning. Notwithstanding this disheartening clearness
      of the sky, great atmospheric changes may take place in less than an
      hour.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But,” asked Kennedy, “is there any sign whatever of that?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Well,” replied the doctor, “I think that there is some slight symptom of
      a fall in the barometer.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “May Heaven hearken to you, Samuel! for here we are pinned to the ground,
      like a bird with broken wings.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “With this difference, however, my dear Dick, that our wings are unhurt,
      and I hope that we shall be able to use them again.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Ah! wind! wind!” exclaimed Joe; “enough to carry us to a stream or a
      well, and we’ll be all right. We have provisions enough, and, with water,
      we could wait a month without suffering; but thirst is a cruel thing!”
     </p>
    <p>
      It was not thirst alone, but the unchanging sight of the desert, that
      fatigued the mind. There was not a variation in the surface of the soil,
      not a hillock of sand, not a pebble, to relieve the gaze. This unbroken
      level discouraged the beholder, and gave him that kind of malady called
      the “desert-sickness.” The impassible monotony of the arid blue sky, and
      the vast yellow expanse of the desert-sand, at length produced a sensation
      of terror. In this inflamed atmosphere the heat appeared to vibrate as it
      does above a blazing hearth, while the mind grew desperate in
      contemplating the limitless calm, and could see no reason why the thing
      should ever end, since immensity is a species of eternity.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus, at last, our hapless travellers, deprived of water in this torrid
      heat, began to feel symptoms of mental disorder. Their eyes swelled in
      their sockets, and their gaze became confused.
    </p>
    <p>
      When night came on, the doctor determined to combat this alarming tendency
      by rapid walking. His idea was to pace the sandy plain for a few hours,
      not in search of any thing, but simply for exercise.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Come along!” he said to his companions; “believe me, it will do you
      good.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Out of the question!” said Kennedy; “I could not walk a step.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And I,” said Joe, “would rather sleep!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But sleep, or even rest, would be dangerous to you, my friends; you must
      react against this tendency to stupor. Come with me!”
     </p>
    <p>
      But the doctor could do nothing with them, and, therefore, set off alone,
      amid the starry clearness of the night. The first few steps he took were
      painful, for they were the steps of an enfeebled man quite out of practice
      in walking. However, he quickly saw that the exercise would be beneficial
      to him, and pushed on several miles to the westward. Once in rapid motion,
      he felt his spirits greatly cheered, when, suddenly, a vertigo came over
      him; he seemed to be poised on the edge of an abyss; his knees bent under
      him; the vast solitude struck terror to his heart; he found himself the
      minute mathematical point, the centre of an infinite circumference, that
      is to say—a nothing! The balloon had disappeared entirely in the
      deepening gloom. The doctor, cool, impassible, reckless explorer that he
      was, felt himself at last seized with a nameless dread. He strove to
      retrace his steps, but in vain. He called aloud. Not even an echo replied,
      and his voice died out in the empty vastness of surrounding space, like a
      pebble cast into a bottomless gulf; then, down he sank, fainting, on the
      sand, alone, amid the eternal silence of the desert.
    </p>
    <p>
      At midnight he came to, in the arms of his faithful follower, Joe. The
      latter, uneasy at his master’s prolonged absence, had set out after him,
      easily tracing him by the clear imprint of his feet in the sand, and had
      found him lying in a swoon.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What has been the matter, sir?” was the first inquiry.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Nothing, Joe, nothing! Only a touch of weakness, that’s all. It’s over
      now.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh! it won’t amount to any thing, sir, I’m sure of that; but get up on
      your feet, if you can. There! lean upon me, and let us get back to the
      balloon.”
     </p>
    <p>
      And the doctor, leaning on Joe’s arm, returned along the track by which he
      had come.
    </p>
    <p>
      “You were too bold, sir; it won’t do to run such risks. You might have
      been robbed,” he added, laughing. “But, sir, come now, let us talk
      seriously.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Speak! I am listening to you.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “We must positively make up our minds to do something. Our present
      situation cannot last more than a few days longer, and if we get no wind,
      we are lost.”
     </p>
    <p>
      The doctor made no reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Well, then, one of us must sacrifice himself for the good of all, and it
      is most natural that it should fall to me to do so.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What have you to propose? What is your plan?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “A very simple one! It is to take provisions enough, and to walk right on
      until I come to some place, as I must do, sooner or later. In the mean
      time, if Heaven sends you a good wind, you need not wait, but can start
      again. For my part, if I come to a village, I’ll work my way through with
      a few Arabic words that you can write for me on a slip of paper, and I’ll
      bring you help or lose my hide. What do you think of my plan?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “It is absolute folly, Joe, but worthy of your noble heart. The thing is
      impossible. You will not leave us.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But, sir, we must do something, and this plan can’t do you any harm, for,
      I say again, you need not wait; and then, after all, I may succeed.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “No, Joe, no! We will not separate. That would only be adding sorrow to
      trouble. It was written that matters should be as they are; and it is very
      probably written that it shall be quite otherwise by-and-by. Let us wait,
      then, with resignation.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “So be it, master; but take notice of one thing: I give you a day longer,
      and I’ll not wait after that. To-day is Sunday; we might say Monday, as it
      is one o’clock in the morning, and if we don’t get off by Tuesday, I’ll
      run the risk. I’ve made up my mind to that!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The doctor made no answer, and in a few minutes they got back to the car,
      where he took his place beside Kennedy, who lay there plunged in silence
      so complete that it could not be considered sleep.
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
