<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      CHAPTER FORTY-SECOND.
    </h2>
    <p>
      A Struggle of Generosity.—The Last Sacrifice.—The Dilating
      Apparatus.—Joe’s Adroitness.—Midnight.—The Doctor’s
      Watch.—Kennedy’s Watch.—The Latter falls asleep at his Post.—The
      Fire.—The Howlings of the Natives.—Out of Range.
    </p>
    <p>
      Doctor Ferguson’s first care was to take his bearings by stellar
      observation, and he discovered that he was scarcely twenty-five miles from
      Senegal.
    </p>
    <p>
      “All that we can manage to do, my friends,” said he, after having pointed
      his map, “is to cross the river; but, as there is neither bridge nor boat,
      we must, at all hazards, cross it with the balloon, and, in order to do
      that, we must still lighten up.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But I don’t exactly see how we can do that?” replied Kennedy, anxious
      about his fire-arms, “unless one of us makes up his mind to sacrifice
      himself for the rest,—that is, to stay behind, and, in my turn, I
      claim that honor.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “You, indeed!” remonstrated Joe; “ain’t I used to—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The question now is, not to throw ourselves out of the car, but simply to
      reach the coast of Africa on foot. I am a first-rate walker, a good
      sportsman, and—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I’ll never consent to it!” insisted Joe.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Your generous rivalry is useless, my brave friends,” said Ferguson; “I
      trust that we shall not come to any such extremity: besides, if we did,
      instead of separating, we should keep together, so as to make our way
      across the country in company.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “That’s the talk,” said Joe; “a little tramp won’t do us any harm.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But before we try that,” resumed the doctor, “we must employ a last means
      of lightening the balloon.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “What will that be? I should like to see it,” said Kennedy, incredulously.
    </p>
    <p>
      “We must get rid of the cylinder-chests, the spiral, and the Buntzen
      battery. Nine hundred pounds make a rather heavy load to carry through the
      air.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But then, Samuel, how will you dilate your gas?”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I shall not do so at all. We’ll have to get along without it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “But—”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Listen, my friends: I have calculated very exactly the amount of
      ascensional force left to us, and it is sufficient to carry us every one
      with the few objects that remain. We shall make in all a weight of hardly
      five hundred pounds, including the two anchors which I desire to keep.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Dear doctor, you know more about the matter than we do; you are the sole
      judge of the situation. Tell us what we ought to do, and we will do it.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “I am at your orders, master,” added Joe.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I repeat, my friends, that however serious the decision may appear, we
      must sacrifice our apparatus.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Let it go, then!” said Kennedy, promptly.
    </p>
    <p>
      “To work!” said Joe.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was no easy job. The apparatus had to be taken down piece by piece.
      First, they took out the mixing reservoir, then the one belonging to the
      cylinder, and lastly the tank in which the decomposition of the water was
      effected. The united strength of all three travellers was required to
      detach these reservoirs from the bottom of the car in which they had been
      so firmly secured; but Kennedy was so strong, Joe so adroit, and the
      doctor so ingenious, that they finally succeeded. The different pieces
      were thrown out, one after the other, and they disappeared below, making
      huge gaps in the foliage of the sycamores.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The black fellows will be mightily astonished,” said Joe, “at finding
      things like those in the woods; they’ll make idols of them!”
     </p>
    <p>
      The next thing to be looked after was the displacement of the pipes that
      were fastened in the balloon and connected with the spiral. Joe succeeded
      in cutting the caoutchouc jointings above the car, but when he came to the
      pipes he found it more difficult to disengage them, because they were held
      by their upper extremity and fastened by wires to the very circlet of the
      valve.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then it was that Joe showed wonderful adroitness. In his naked feet, so as
      not to scratch the covering, he succeeded by the aid of the network, and
      in spite of the oscillations of the balloon, in climbing to the upper
      extremity, and after a thousand difficulties, in holding on with one hand
      to that slippery surface, while he detached the outside screws that
      secured the pipes in their place. These were then easily taken out, and
      drawn away by the lower end, which was hermetically sealed by means of a
      strong ligature.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Victoria, relieved of this considerable weight, rose upright in the
      air and tugged strongly at the anchor-rope.
    </p>
    <p>
      About midnight this work ended without accident, but at the cost of most
      severe exertion, and the trio partook of a luncheon of pemmican and cold
      punch, as the doctor had no more fire to place at Joe’s disposal.
    </p>
    <p>
      Besides, the latter and Kennedy were dropping off their feet with fatigue.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Lie down, my friends, and get some rest,” said the doctor. “I’ll take the
      first watch; at two o’clock I’ll waken Kennedy; at four, Kennedy will
      waken Joe, and at six we’ll start; and may Heaven have us in its keeping
      for this last day of the trip!”
     </p>
    <p>
      Without waiting to be coaxed, the doctor’s two companions stretched
      themselves at the bottom of the car and dropped into profound slumber on
      the instant.
    </p>
    <p>
      The night was calm. A few clouds broke against the last quarter of the
      moon, whose uncertain rays scarcely pierced the darkness. Ferguson,
      resting his elbows on the rim of the car, gazed attentively around him. He
      watched with close attention the dark screen of foliage that spread
      beneath him, hiding the ground from his view. The least noise aroused his
      suspicions, and he questioned even the slightest rustling of the leaves.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was in that mood which solitude makes more keenly felt, and during
      which vague terrors mount to the brain. At the close of such a journey,
      after having surmounted so many obstacles, and at the moment of touching
      the goal, one’s fears are more vivid, one’s emotions keener. The point of
      arrival seems to fly farther from our gaze.
    </p>
    <p>
      Moreover, the present situation had nothing very consolatory about it.
      They were in the midst of a barbarous country, and dependent upon a
      vehicle that might fail them at any moment. The doctor no longer counted
      implicitly on his balloon; the time had gone by when he manoevred it
      boldly because he felt sure of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Under the influence of these impressions, the doctor, from time to time,
      thought that he heard vague sounds in the vast forests around him; he even
      fancied that he saw a swift gleam of fire shining between the trees. He
      looked sharply and turned his night-glass toward the spot; but there was
      nothing to be seen, and the profoundest silence appeared to return.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had, no doubt, been under the dominion of a mere hallucination. He
      continued to listen, but without hearing the slightest noise. When his
      watch had expired, he woke Kennedy, and, enjoining upon him to observe the
      extremest vigilance, took his place beside Joe, and fell sound asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      Kennedy, while still rubbing his eyes, which he could scarcely keep open,
      calmly lit his pipe. He then ensconced himself in a corner, and began to
      smoke vigorously by way of keeping awake.
    </p>
    <p>
      The most absolute silence reigned around him; a light wind shook the
      tree-tops and gently rocked the car, inviting the hunter to taste the
      sleep that stole over him in spite of himself. He strove hard to resist
      it, and repeatedly opened his eyes to plunge into the outer darkness one
      of those looks that see nothing; but at last, yielding to fatigue, he sank
      back and slumbered.
    </p>
    <p>
      How long he had been buried in this stupor he knew not, but he was
      suddenly aroused from it by a strange, unexpected crackling sound.
    </p>
    <p>
      He rubbed his eyes and sprang to his feet. An intense glare half-blinded
      him and heated his cheek—the forest was in flames!
    </p>
    <p>
      “Fire! fire!” he shouted, scarcely comprehending what had happened.
    </p>
    <p>
      His two companions started up in alarm.
    </p>
    <p>
      “What’s the matter?” was the doctor’s immediate exclamation.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Fire!” said Joe. “But who could—”
     </p>
    <p>
      At this moment loud yells were heard under the foliage, which was now
      illuminated as brightly as the day.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Ah! the savages!” cried Joe again; “they have set fire to the forest so
      as to be the more certain of burning us up.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “The Talabas! Al-Hadji’s marabouts, no doubt,” said the doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      A circle of fire hemmed the Victoria in; the crackling of the dry wood
      mingled with the hissing and sputtering of the green branches; the
      clambering vines, the foliage, all the living part of this vegetation,
      writhed in the destructive element. The eye took in nothing but one vast
      ocean of flame; the large trees stood forth in black relief in this huge
      furnace, their branches covered with glowing coals, while the whole
      blazing mass, the entire conflagration, was reflected on the clouds, and
      the travellers could fancy themselves enveloped in a hollow globe of fire.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Let us escape to the ground!” shouted Kennedy, “it is our only chance of
      safety!”
     </p>
    <p>
      But Ferguson checked him with a firm grasp, and, dashing at the
      anchor-rope, severed it with one well-directed blow of his hatchet.
      Meanwhile, the flames, leaping up at the balloon, already quivered on its
      illuminated sides; but the Victoria, released from her fastenings, spun
      upward a thousand feet into the air.
    </p>
    <p>
      Frightful yells resounded through the forest, along with the report of
      fire-arms, while the balloon, caught in a current of air that rose with
      the dawn of day, was borne to the westward.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was now four o’clock in the morning.
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
