<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Twenty-Ninth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>Twenty-Ninth</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Signs of Vegetation.⁠—The Fantastic Notion of a French Author.⁠—A
 Magnificent Country.⁠—The Kingdom of Adamova.⁠—The Explorations
 of Speke and Burton connected with those of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barth.⁠—The Atlantika
 Mountains.⁠—The River Benoué.⁠—The City of Yola.⁠—The
 Bagelé.⁠—Mount Mendif.
 </p>
			</header>
 <p>
 From the moment of their departure, the travellers moved with great
 velocity. They longed to leave behind them the desert, which had so nearly
 been fatal to them.
 </p>
 <p>
 About a quarter-past nine in the morning, they caught a glimpse of some
 signs of vegetation: herbage floating on that sea of sand, and announcing,
 as the weeds upon the ocean did to Christopher Columbus, the nearness of
 the shore⁠—green shoots peeping up timidly between pebbles that were,
 in their turn, to be the rocks of that vast expanse.
 </p>
 <p>
 Hills, but of trifling height, were seen in wavy lines upon the horizon.
 Their profile, muffled by the heavy mist, was defined but vaguely. The
 monotony, however, was beginning to disappear.
 </p>
 <p>
 The doctor hailed with joy the new country thus disclosed, and, like a
 seaman on lookout at the masthead, he was ready to shout aloud:
 </p>
 <p>
 “Land, ho! land!”
 </p>
 <p>
 An hour later the continent spread broadly before their gaze, still wild
 in aspect, but less flat, less denuded, and with a few trees standing out
 against the gray sky.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We are in a civilized country at last!” said the hunter.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Civilized? Well, that’s one way of speaking; but there are no people to
 be seen yet.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It will not be long before we see them,” said Ferguson, “at our present
 rate of travel.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Are we still in the negro country, doctor?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Yes, and on our way to the country of the Arabs.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “What! real Arabs, sir, with their camels?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “No, not many camels; they are scarce, if not altogether unknown, in these
 regions. We must go a few degrees farther north to see them.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “What a pity!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And why, Joe?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Because, if the wind fell contrary, they might be of use to us.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “How so?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, sir, it’s just a notion that’s got into my head: we might hitch
 them to the car, and make them tow us along. What do you say to that,
 doctor?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Poor Joe! Another person had that idea in advance of you. It was used by
 a very gifted French author⁠—M. Méry⁠—in a romance, it is true.
 He has his travellers drawn along in a balloon by a team of camels; then a
 lion comes up, devours the camels, swallows the towrope, and hauls the
 balloon in their stead; and so on through the story. You see that the
 whole thing is the top-flower of fancy, but has nothing in common with our
 style of locomotion.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Joe, a little cut down at learning that his idea had been used already,
 cudgelled his wits to imagine what animal could have devoured the lion;
 but he could not guess it, and so quietly went on scanning the appearance
 of the country.
 </p>
 <p>
 A lake of medium extent stretched away before him, surrounded by an
 amphitheatre of hills, which yet could not be dignified with the name of
 mountains. There were winding valleys, numerous and fertile, with their
 tangled thickets of the most various trees. The African oil-tree rose
 above the mass, with leaves fifteen feet in length upon its stalk, the
 latter studded with sharp thorns; the bombax, or silk-cotton-tree, filled
 the wind, as it swept by, with the fine down of its seeds; the pungent
 odors of the <i>pendanus</i>, the “kenda” of the Arabs, perfumed the air up to
 the height where the <i>Victoria</i> was sailing; the papaw-tree, with its
 palm-shaped leaves; the <i>sterculier</i>, which produces the Sudan-nut; the
 baobab, and the banana-tree, completed the luxuriant flora of these
 inter-tropical regions.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The country is superb!” said the doctor.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Here are some animals,” added Joe. “Men are not far away.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh, what magnificent elephants!” exclaimed Kennedy. “Is there no way to
 get a little shooting?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “How could we manage to halt in a current as strong as this? No, Dick; you
 must taste a little of the torture of Tantalus just now. You shall make up
 for it afterward.”
 </p>
 <p>
 And, in truth, there was enough to excite the fancy of a sportsman. Dick’s
 heart fairly leaped in his breast as he grasped the butt of his Purdy.
 </p>
 <p>
 The fauna of the region were as striking as its flora. The wild-ox
 revelled in dense herbage that often concealed his whole body; gray,
 black, and yellow elephants of the most gigantic size burst headlong, like
 a living hurricane, through the forests, breaking, rending, tearing down,
 devastating every thing in their path; upon the woody slopes of the hills
 trickled cascades and springs flowing northward; there, too, the
 hippopotami bathed their huge forms, splashing and snorting as they
 frolicked in the water, and lamantins, twelve feet long, with bodies like
 seals, stretched themselves along the banks, turning up toward the sun
 their rounded teats swollen with milk.
 </p>
 <p>
 It was a whole menagerie of rare and curious beasts in a wondrous
 hothouse, where numberless birds with plumage of a thousand hues gleamed
 and fluttered in the sunshine.
 </p>
 <p>
 By this prodigality of Nature, the doctor recognized the splendid kingdom
 of Adamova.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We are now beginning to trench upon the realm of modern discovery. I have
 taken up the lost scent of preceding travellers. It is a happy chance, my
 friends, for we shall be enabled to link the toils of Captains Burton and
 Speke with the explorations of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barth. We have left the Englishmen
 behind us, and now have caught up with the Hamburger. It will not be long,
 either, before we arrive at the extreme point attained by that daring
 explorer.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It seems to me that there is a vast extent of country between the two
 explored routes,” remarked Kennedy; “at least, if I am to judge by the
 distance that we have made.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It is easy to determine: take the map and see what is the longitude of
 the southern point of Lake Ukéréoué, reached by Speke.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It is near the thirty-seventh degree.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And the city of Yola, which we shall sight this evening, and to which
 Barth penetrated, what is its position?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It is about in the twelfth degree of east longitude.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Then there are twenty-five degrees, or, counting sixty miles to each,
 about fifteen hundred miles in all.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “A nice little walk,” said Joe, “for people who have to go on foot.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It will be accomplished, however. Livingstone and Moffat are pushing on
 up this line toward the interior. Nyassa, which they have discovered, is
 not far from Lake Tanganayika, seen by Burton. Ere the close of the
 century these regions will, undoubtedly, be explored. But,” added the
 doctor, consulting his compass, “I regret that the wind is carrying us so
 far to the westward. I wanted to get to the north.”
 </p>
 <p>
 After twelve hours of progress, the <i>Victoria</i> found herself on the confines
 of Nigritia. The first inhabitants of this region, the Chouas Arabs, were
 feeding their wandering flocks. The immense summits of the Atlantika
 Mountains seen above the horizon⁠—mountains that no European foot had
 yet scaled, and whose height is computed to be ten thousand feet! Their
 western slope determines the flow of all the waters in this region of
 Africa toward the ocean. They are the Mountains of the Moon to this part
 of the continent.
 </p>
 <p>
 At length a real river greeted the gaze of our travellers, and, by the
 enormous anthills seen in its vicinity, the doctor recognized the Benoué,
 one of the great tributaries of the Niger, the one which the natives have
 called “The Fountain of the Waters.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “This river,” said the doctor to his companions, “will, one day, be the
 natural channel of communication with the interior of Nigritia. Under the
 command of one of our brave captains, the steamer <i>Pleiad</i> has already
 ascended as far as the town of Yola. You see that we are not in an unknown
 country.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Numerous slaves were engaged in the labors of the field, cultivating
 sorgho, a kind of millet which forms the chief basis of their diet; and
 the most stupid expressions of astonishment ensued as the <i>Victoria</i> sped
 past like a meteor. That evening the balloon halted about forty miles from
 Yola, and ahead of it, but in the distance, rose the two sharp cones of
 Mount Mendif.
 </p>
 <p>
 The doctor threw out his anchors and made fast to the top of a high tree;
 but a very violent wind beat upon the balloon with such force as to throw
 it over on its side, thus rendering the position of the car sometimes
 extremely dangerous. Ferguson did not close his all night, and he was
 repeatedly on the point of cutting the anchor-rope and scudding away
 before the gale. At length, however, the storm abated, and the
 oscillations of the balloon ceased to be alarming.
 </p>
 <p>
 On the morrow the wind was more moderate, but it carried our travellers
 away from the city of Yola, which recently rebuilt by the Fouillans,
 excited Ferguson’s curiosity. However, he had to make up his mind to being
 borne farther to the northward and even a little to the east.
 </p>
 <p>
 Kennedy proposed to halt in this fine hunting-country, and Joe declared
 that the need of fresh meat was beginning to be felt; but the savage
 customs of the country, the attitude of the population, and some shots
 fired at the <i>Victoria</i>, admonished the doctor to continue his journey. They
 were then crossing a region that was the scene of massacres and burnings,
 and where warlike conflicts between the barbarian sultans, contending for
 their power amid the most atrocious carnage, never cease.
 </p>
 <p>
 Numerous and populous villages of long low huts stretched away between
 broad pasture-fields whose dense herbage was besprinkled with
 violet-colored blossoms. The huts, looking like huge beehives, were
 sheltered behind bristling palisades. The wild hillsides and hollows
 frequently reminded the beholder of the glens in the Highlands of
 Scotland, as Kennedy more than once remarked.
 </p>
 <p>
 In spite of all he could do, the doctor bore directly to the northeast,
 toward Mount Mendif, which was lost in the midst of environing clouds. The
 lofty summits of these mountains separate the valley of the Niger from the
 basin of Lake Tchad.
 </p>
 <p>
 Soon afterward was seen the Bagélé, with its eighteen villages clinging to
 its flanks like a whole brood of children to their mother’s bosom⁠—a
 magnificent spectacle for the beholder whose gaze commanded and took in
 the entire picture at one view. Even the ravines were seen to be covered
 with fields of rice and of arachides.
 </p>
 <p>
 By three o’clock the <i>Victoria</i> was directly in front of Mount Mendif. It
 had been impossible to avoid it; the only thing to be done was to cross
 it. The doctor, by means of a temperature increased to one hundred and
 eighty degrees, gave the balloon a fresh ascensional force of nearly
 sixteen hundred pounds, and it went up to an elevation of more than eight
 thousand feet, the greatest height attained during the journey. The
 temperature of the atmosphere was so much cooler at that point that the
 aeronauts had to resort to their blankets and thick coverings.
 </p>
 <p>
 Ferguson was in haste to descend; the covering of the balloon gave
 indications of bursting, but in the meanwhile he had time to satisfy
 himself of the volcanic origin of the mountain, whose extinct craters are
 now but deep abysses. Immense accumulations of bird-guano gave the sides
 of Mount Mendif the appearance of calcareous rocks, and there was enough
 of the deposit there to manure all the lands in the United Kingdom.
 </p>
 <p>
 At five o’clock the <i>Victoria</i>, sheltered from the south winds, went gently
 gliding along the slopes of the mountain, and stopped in a wide clearing
 remote from any habitation. The instant it touched the soil, all needful
 precautions were taken to hold it there firmly; and Kennedy, fowling-piece
 in hand, sallied out upon the sloping plain. Ere long, he returned with
 half a dozen wild ducks and a kind of snipe, which Joe served up in his
 best style. The meal was heartily relished, and the night was passed in
 undisturbed and refreshing slumber.
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
