<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tenth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Tenth</h2>
 <p>
 Former Experiments.⁠—The Doctor’s Five Receptacles.⁠—The Gas
 Cylinder.⁠—The Calorifere.⁠—The System of Manoeuvring.⁠—Success
 certain.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The attempt has often been made, gentlemen,” said the doctor, “to rise
 and descend at will, without losing ballast or gas from the balloon. A
 French aeronaut, M. Meunier, tried to accomplish this by compressing air
 in an inner receptacle. A Belgian, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Van Hecke, by means of wings and
 paddles, obtained a vertical power that would have sufficed in most cases,
 but the practical results secured from these experiments have been
 insignificant.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I therefore resolved to go about the thing more directly; so, at the
 start, I dispensed with ballast altogether, excepting as a provision for
 cases of special emergency, such as the breakage of my apparatus, or the
 necessity of ascending very suddenly, so as to avoid unforeseen obstacles.
 </p>
 <p>
 “My means of ascent and descent consist simply in dilating or contracting
 the gas that is in the balloon by the application of different
 temperatures, and here is the method of obtaining that result.
 </p>
 <p>
 “You saw me bring on board with the car several cases or receptacles, the
 use of which you may not have understood. They are five in number.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The first contains about twenty-five gallons of water, to which I add a
 few drops of sulphuric acid, so as to augment its capacity as a conductor
 of electricity, and then I decompose it by means of a powerful Buntzen
 battery. Water, as you know, consists of two parts of hydrogen to one of
 oxygen gas.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The latter, through the action of the battery, passes at its positive
 pole into the second receptacle. A third receptacle, placed above the
 second one, and of double its capacity, receives the hydrogen passing into
 it by the negative pole.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Stopcocks, of which one has an orifice twice the size of the other,
 communicate between these receptacles and a fourth one, which is called
 the mixture reservoir, since in it the two gases obtained by the
 decomposition of the water do really commingle. The capacity of this
 fourth tank is about forty-one cubic feet.
 </p>
 <p>
 “On the upper part of this tank is a platinum tube provided with a
 stopcock.
 </p>
 <p>
 “You will now readily understand, gentlemen, the apparatus that I have
 described to you is really a gas cylinder and blowpipe for oxygen and
 hydrogen, the heat of which exceeds that of a forge fire.
 </p>
 <p>
 “This much established, I proceed to the second part of my apparatus. From
 the lowest part of my balloon, which is hermetically closed, issue two
 tubes a little distance apart. The one starts among the upper layers of
 the hydrogen gas, the other amid the lower layers.
 </p>
 <p>
 “These two pipes are provided at intervals with strong jointings of
 india-rubber, which enable them to move in harmony with the oscillations
 of the balloon.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Both of them run down as far as the car, and lose themselves in an iron
 receptacle of cylindrical form, which is called the heat-tank. The latter
 is closed at its two ends by two strong plates of the same metal.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The pipe running from the lower part of the balloon runs into this
 cylindrical receptacle through the lower plate; it penetrates the latter
 and then takes the form of a helicoidal or screw-shaped spiral, the rings
 of which, rising one over the other, occupy nearly the whole of the height
 of the tank. Before again issuing from it, this spiral runs into a small
 cone with a concave base, that is turned downward in the shape of a
 spherical cap.
 </p>
 <p>
 “It is from the top of this cone that the second pipe issues, and it runs,
 as I have said, into the upper beds of the balloon.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The spherical cap of the small cone is of platinum, so as not to melt by
 the action of the cylinder and blowpipe, for the latter are placed upon
 the bottom of the iron tank in the midst of the helicoidal spiral, and the
 extremity of their flame will slightly touch the cap in question.
 </p>
 <p>
 “You all know, gentlemen, what a calorifere, to heat apartments, is. You
 know how it acts. The air of the apartments is forced to pass through its
 pipes, and is then released with a heightened temperature. Well, what I
 have just described to you is nothing more nor less than a calorifere.
 </p>
 <p>
 “In fact, what is it that takes place? The cylinder once lighted, the
 hydrogen in the spiral and in the concave cone becomes heated, and rapidly
 ascends through the pipe that leads to the upper part of the balloon. A
 vacuum is created below, and it attracts the gas in the lower parts; this
 becomes heated in its turn, and is continually replaced; thus, an
 extremely rapid current of gas is established in the pipes and in the
 spiral, which issues from the balloon and then returns to it, and is
 heated over again, incessantly.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Now, the cases increase ¼80 of their volume for each degree of heat
 applied. If, then, I force the temperature 18 degrees, the hydrogen of the
 balloon will dilate 18/480 or 1614 cubic feet, and will, therefore,
 displace 1614 more cubic feet of air, which will increase its ascensional
 power by 160 pounds. This is equivalent to throwing out that weight of
 ballast. If I augment the temperature by 180 degrees, the gas will dilate
 180/480 and will displace 16,740 cubic feet more, and its ascensional
 force will be augmented by 1,600 pounds.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Thus, you see, gentlemen, that I can easily effect very considerable
 changes of equilibrium. The volume of the balloon has been calculated in
 such manner that, when half inflated, it displaces a weight of air exactly
 equal to that of the envelope containing the hydrogen gas, and of the car
 occupied by the passengers, and all its apparatus and accessories. At this
 point of inflation, it is in exact equilibrium with the air, and neither
 mounts nor descends.
 </p>
 <p>
 “In order, then, to effect an ascent, I give the gas a temperature
 superior to the temperature of the surrounding air by means of my
 cylinder. By this excess of heat it obtains a larger distention, and
 inflates the balloon more. The latter, then, ascends in proportion as I
 heat the hydrogen.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The descent, of course, is effected by lowering the heat of the cylinder,
 and letting the temperature abate. The ascent would be, usually, more
 rapid than the descent; but that is a fortunate circumstance, since it is
 of no importance to me to descend rapidly, while, on the other hand, it is
 by a very rapid ascent that I avoid obstacles. The real danger lurks
 below, and not above.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Besides, as I have said, I have a certain quantity of ballast, which will
 enable me to ascend more rapidly still, when necessary. My valve, at the
 top of the balloon, is nothing more nor less than a safety-valve. The
 balloon always retains the same quantity of hydrogen, and the variations
 of temperature that I produce in the midst of this shut-up gas are, of
 themselves, sufficient to provide for all these ascending and descending
 movements.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Now, gentlemen, as a practical detail, let me add this:
 </p>
 <p>
 “The combustion of the hydrogen and of the oxygen at the point of the
 cylinder produces solely the vapor or steam of water. I have, therefore,
 provided the lower part of the cylindrical iron box with a scape-pipe,
 with a valve operating by means of a pressure of two atmospheres;
 consequently, so soon as this amount of pressure is attained, the steam
 escapes of itself.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Here are the exact figures: 25 gallons of water, separated into its
 constituent elements, yield 200 pounds of oxygen and 25 pounds of
 hydrogen. This represents, at atmospheric tension, 1,800 cubic feet of the
 former and 3,780 cubic feet of the latter, or 5,670 cubic feet, in all, of
 the mixture. Hence, the stopcock of my cylinder, when fully open, expends
 27 cubic feet per hour, with a flame at least six times as strong as that
 of the large lamps used for lighting streets. On an average, then, and in
 order to keep myself at a very moderate elevation, I should not burn more
 than nine cubic feet per hour, so that my twenty-five gallons of water
 represent six hundred and thirty-six hours of aerial navigation, or a
 little more than twenty-six days.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, as I can descend when I please, to replenish my stock of water on
 the way, my trip might be indefinitely prolonged.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Such, gentlemen, is my secret. It is simple, and, like most simple
 things, it cannot fail to succeed. The dilation and contraction of the gas
 in the balloon is my means of locomotion, which calls for neither
 cumbersome wings, nor any other mechanical motor. A calorifere to produce
 the changes of temperature, and a cylinder to generate the heat, are
 neither inconvenient nor heavy. I think, therefore, that I have combined
 all the elements of success.”
 </p>
 <p>
 <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ferguson here terminated his discourse, and was most heartily
 applauded. There was not an objection to make to it; all had been foreseen
 and decided.
 </p>
 <p>
 “However,” said the captain, “the thing may prove dangerous.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “What matters that,” replied the doctor, “provided that it be
 practicable?”
 </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
